Developers from Russia really are in demand on the market, simply because of their skills. Multiplayer games always annoyed me, because I'm someone who values story. These days we can stand in the middle of a city, life is going on all around us, and we realize that every character has, say, a scripted daily routine. And in that sense it's definitely developing, of course. You can't do development without math, unfortunately. That's just how it is. Alas. Not "play games," but "expand your range of references" instead.

Hi, everyone. This is an episode of the podcast "Cozy FCS," where we talk about technology and education in computer science. My name is Evgeny Sokolov, I'm the host of the podcast. Today we're going to talk about game development, about how this market is structured in Russia and around the world, what professions exist in it, and how to learn all of this. And our guests are major experts in this field. Vova Makarov, head of the news department at Igromania and Kanobu, writer and editor. And Nikita Veselko, who, for us, is probably first and foremost a graduate of the FCS bachelor's and master's programs and a PhD student at FCS, and also the former CEO of the game development studio Vintorok and the founder and CPO of several IT startups right now. Hi.

Usually we start with the guests telling us a little about themselves. Vova, if you can, briefly about your journey.

Sure. I've been a huge fan of games since childhood. And I think a lot of people started by watching older kids play. In my case it was Heroes 3 and Civilization. And by the end of 2016 I moved over to work at Igromania. And since then I've been gradually growing. And now I've reached the point where I both play games and write about games, so I get a double dose of enjoyment.

Got it. Nikita, tell us about yourself.

I had an interesting path. I thought that developing games was boring, and playing them was fun. And when I was applying as a first-year, I was actually planning to be a mobile developer of some sort. And then someone showed me the Unity engine, and I was like, "Oh, cool." Then someone showed me Unreal, and I was like, "Oh, cool." And so, since I'd applied to study as a developer, I went into game development. And then comes the less interesting part of life, when fate carried me into management and administration. And at some point in my life I shifted more in that direction. But I keep actively promoting Unreal and hating on Unity in Russia, and playing games.

And playing games.

Well, there's less and less time for that, but you've got to play. Yes, you have to.

All right, good. Let's first try to figure out how this world of computer games is structured in general. Let's probably discuss what kinds of games there are. There are different classifications, as I understand it. In particular, I've heard there are things like AAA and AA. Can you tell us what those are?

Yes, I can take a guess. In general, anyone can create a game, that's worth understanding right away. Even a single person can create their own unique game that becomes a worldwide hit. Such games are called indie, meaning one person, a small team. But indeed, the bigger the budget, the more A's at the start: there's AA, there's AAA, there's even AAAA. Well, that's already kind of a meme expression, because actually, the more A's such games have, the worse they tend to get.

So, basically, depending on the budget there are different categories, and the genres differ too, and everything differs. Are there actual thresholds there? Like, if the budget is more than, I don't know, 10 million dollars, then it's... ?

As a rule, it's all subjective. That is, if we see a small game, well, it might be indie, not necessarily, but most likely. But if it's a multi-million project from a publisher like Ubisoft, Microsoft, Sony, or Nintendo, then it's AAA, you can immediately see that hundreds of millions of dollars went into every pixel. And that's how it turns out.

Okay. But that's from the budget standpoint. What other classifications are there?

Well, of course, by genre, that's the simplest one: racing, strategy, shooters, anything. And naturally, each genre tends to favor its own engine depending on the situation, but Nikita can tell you more about engines, I think. Because, for example, Unreal Engine 5, which is popular right now, is used in the most modern blockbusters with great visuals, great lighting, requiring you to have an RTX graphics card in your computer that supports ray tracing. And Unity, of course, for simpler games.

The classification can be absolutely anything. From how many people worked on it, to genre, to publisher, to platform. By the way, that's an important one.

The simplest one is PC, probably, right? So mobile would be more complicated than...?

No, well, there you have to get into the details, so to speak. There's no such thing as one being harder and another easier. It always depends heavily on the specifics of the project. A game might be simple on PC and complicated on mobile, or vice versa, it also depends on the genre, on the scope, again, and so on.

But you're not even mentioning PlayStation, Xbox?

No, well, consoles, naturally, can be mentioned too. It's just that usually, when you make games, there are exclusives, which Sony likes to do, but even Sony has now started porting its games to PC. So usually you make a game on PC, and most likely it'll be ported to console by default after some time, if it sold successfully on PC. Why turn down money you could earn for yourself?

Can we say that PC and consoles are more about big games with a story and so on, while browser and mobile games are more about, like, casual stuff?

No, on the contrary, indie games are more often made for the PC, for example. Why? Because the PC market is much simpler. You have this platform, Steam, there are Steam fests where indie devs compete with each other for the top, so to speak.

An important remark.

Yes. On the mobile market it's a bit more complicated. The mobile market is much, I'd even say partly more expensive, simply because the success of a mobile game depends not so much on your game as on the marketing budget. With PC games it's easier here. With a PC game you really can launch with a not-very-large marketing budget. If you have a good, interesting game, you can gather a certain number of wishlists, get featured. Featuring is the process when the store itself promotes you, if it sees that you have good metrics, good conversion. With mobile games it's a bit more complicated. So that's why, for example, indie games are mostly on PC, and then they get ported from there to consoles or the Nintendo Switch, which can also be considered a console.

And browser games?

Browser games are most often made by companies. There are games you make for the soul. Take indie games, for instance. There are several categories. You can make a game for the soul, you can make a game just because you want to make a game, and maybe you don't even want to publish it, or you can make a game as a business, if you want to earn money from it. Browser games are usually, of course, when we're talking about earning money. Because they're most often multiplayer with some big monetization around them, where you earn a huge amount of money per month at release, while the game itself... I mean, if you compare the size of, say, a PC indie game and the volume of content in a browser game, that'll be a completely different level, in terms of content volume. So it's more about earning money like that.

Got it. When we were talking before the episode, Nikita mentioned there's also VR, and that it's a whole other world. Can we say it's also about game dev, or is it something entirely different?

Well, VR is also a platform. Like, in the same series as mobile phone, PC, it's also a platform. You can make more than just games on it. PC VR can also be used for more than just games. PC VR can be used for various so-called Serious Games, that's when we talk about various training tools, simulators. There's VR for various exhibitions, there are VR games, yes. So in fact, these are platforms: mobile platforms, the VR platform, and consoles, let's say. They essentially differ in their UX. That is, they differ in the way the player, in our case the user, interacts with our software. On mobile it's this screen, on PC it's the keyboard, mouse, or a controller, which you can sometimes connect to a PC; and VR, accordingly, is the headset and your virtual joysticks that you hold in your hands.

Now let's talk a bit about trends, and the first question on this topic, I suppose. Isn't there a sense that VR somehow didn't take off? I'd be curious, I have my own opinion, but I'm interested to hear the take from, like, the journalism standpoint, how it's being positioned now.

When VR was just getting started, people had high expectations from all of it, that games were now going to change, that there'd be a new generation and all that. But in reality the hype far outstripped the technical capabilities of the devices. And when people first started immersing themselves in all of it, at first it was "wow," amazing. The reality and what a person sees were different. But over time it all wore off. People started noticing the flaws in all of it. And of course, now, on top of all that, VR headsets require a lot of technical horsepower inside the PC or consoles, and all of it produces a far from outstanding picture. So I'd say that right now VR is more for enthusiasts, for those who want to immerse themselves, but not for the mass-market player, because not everyone has a computer at home with a 4080, or a PlayStation 5 with a PS VR2. But maybe I'm wrong, maybe VR is doing well.

There's the opinion of someone who isn't in the VR market, and someone who is in the VR market, and for some reason it always differs. First of all, we don't need a base for VR yet. I mean, I agree that, yes, indeed, there was a VR boom at one point. But this always... If you look at it, there's this concept, the Gartner diagram, when a technology has its own peak, then plateaus, and so on. Naturally, any technology goes through this spike, and everyone expects much more from it than they actually get. But the technology still reaches a plateau, and VR essentially reached that plateau at some point; it found its audience, and they're doing fine there. It has its quirks, of course. First of all, the market is fairly captured by a monopoly, because right now there's basically a single headset in the world that's the most popular. It's standalone, it doesn't yet require... For example, you can play, walk around with it, even ride in an airplane. There's a channel called "Nyryaem" ("Let's Dive"), run by Lyosha Kolyanchuk from Kolkovo. He literally shows in an airplane how he's flying for 8 hours somewhere, and he spends the time sitting right there in VR.

So VR did find its market, it's fairly popular. The picture there is actually really good now compared to what it used to be, especially considering that there's a special feature: you see the display not like a standard monitor, but very close up, and so you don't need an extremely high-quality picture for it to look beautiful. The only caveat is, yes, the market there isn't as big as PC or mobile. So, for example, with AAA games whose budgets are measured in hundreds of millions of dollars, there's no point going into VR, because you won't recoup it. From a brand standpoint, if, say, you have some big franchise and you want to also highlight it in the VR market, then maybe okay. But if you just want to make a game, then, of course, conditionally, a budget of more than a million or two dollars makes no sense, in my opinion, because beyond that the risks get quite high that you won't recoup it, you won't sell, and so on. But at the same time the VR market, on the other hand, is currently undersaturated. That is, if hundreds of games come out on Steam per day, then in the VR market sometimes only one comes out, and sometimes no new release comes out at all.

So, I take it, the barrier to entry for a developer is higher there. With indie games it's like, please, just sit down at your computer and program, but here you have to buy a headset and all that.

Well, yes, but the headset costs about 40,000 rubles. So, considering how much a computer costs now, I built a good one back in December, not a super-duper one, you're already paying 1,250 [dollars] for it, so 40,000 for a headset can be found too, if you really want one. Again, there are stories of indie developers who go years without earning anything. There's a story, the so-called "married hero," where for two years a man earns basically nothing, sitting at the computer making an indie game while his wife feeds him, and then suddenly, bam, he turns out to have become a very, very rich man.

Trends, I suppose this is a somewhat abstract question, but nonetheless, maybe something's happening in the game industry right now. I don't know, some genres dying, some suddenly becoming more popular. I don't know, Vova, you've probably got a wide range of references here, right?

I think Nikita and I will agree here, in the sense that for a while now there's been a lot of popularity around free-to-play games. That is, if before we had MMOs, we knew what an MMO was, like World of Warcraft, you log in, level up your character, and so on, now there are shooters, say, you log into a team-based shooter like Blizzard's games or Marvel Rivals, and it's just team versus team battling, or Counter-Strike, the well-known series. People just log in, they're not obligated to pay anything, they just play. But the companies, the developers, of course, make provisions for you to be able to gain an extra advantage, cosmetics, usually, if you pay a certain amount. This trend, I don't know, it's been going for, I think, 10 years now. And right now, despite the fact that some games flop, it persists. But of course, no matter what anyone says, good story-driven, single-player games will always be relevant. No matter who says you need to socialize, that you need to spend time with friends, yes, of course, but listening to a good story is interesting too, important too.

Multiplayer games always annoyed me because I value the story, and it feels like fewer and fewer story-driven games are coming out, it seems to me. Well, maybe that's just me, I rarely play, but it seems like there are few, or they're not made well, or made decently.

It may seem that way because good games really are few. Many story-driven games, unfortunately, can be treated with skepticism, but the author has their own vision, and the audience's opinion can be completely different. And that's why some games spark debate. That doesn't make the games bad. It's just that the audience's attitude toward these games becomes rather ambiguous. So, unfortunately, games that everyone would unambiguously like, both in strategy and in story and so on, aren't that many, but that doesn't mean they don't exist. If some solo developer has the desire to create the perfect game, inspired by Mario, a platformer, anything, they can do it. As long as they like it themselves, then the audience will like it too.

That's clear. Nikita, if you've got something to add quickly about changes, the baseline.

Well, first of all, the market is cyclical. And if we talk again about expensive franchise games, in general nothing changes there, because they have their fan base, they kind of put out their stream of games. And likewise with games like shooters and so on, those are more like esports games. In general, the trend there is also pretty consistent. Trends change more on the monetization side. That is, maybe before one monetization tool was popular, then they came up with the Battle Pass, and all games started doing a Battle Pass. No matter the genre. The Battle Pass is cool. Everyone knows what a Battle Pass is. Let's do it in the game. Genres are more subject to change specifically in markets like indie games, the B market, the A market, that is, where the market is smaller, where each game has to win its own audience, yes, that's where it's noticeable. For example, five years ago some genres were popular, then they suddenly changed, other genres became popular, and they cycle like that. In very large games they're usually less subject to such changes, because you always see a AAA game, no matter which one, like, I'll buy it, because a AAA game comes out rarely, for example.

And the last question. Can you name any AAA games that were released in Russia in recent years?

Well, again, we come back to the fact that AAA is an abstract concept.

Well, conditionally, in your opinion?

Yeah. Well, if we say that AAA is measured by budget, then sure, we can. The next question that comes up is quality. But again, take, say, Smuta, which came out, and before that Atomic Heart came out. Although there's also debate about Atomic Heart. AAA, that's still not quite... But we'll take it broadly. If you assess the quality, games from Russia used to be worse. It's clear that these aren't the quality of Europe or America, but there's no point comparing them, because they're two different markets. There it's a market of certain budgets, here it's a market of different budgets, different opportunities, different talent, again. For example, our game dev education also lags far behind European and American education, not in quality but rather in scale. So from the standpoint of whether such games are appearing, yes, of course, they're appearing. Naturally, you can't compare them directly, and on the contrary, it's good that they're appearing, like, sure there are flaws, it's not bad, well, we bought it, we supported Russian game dev, it keeps developing, and it seems the next game will be better and better. At some point we'll reach that level.

You answered that very diplomatically, but you said Smuta, Atomic Heart, and now in development, well, both Smuta and... the ones that came out, those count. There are also several AAA games in development right now. The Pioner team is making it. Distortion, that's a game still in development right now, for example.

Well, there's also another question, that there are games that are formally released not from Russia. Say, the developers are located in another country, but the bulk of the developers are specifically in Russia. And we discussed this, but I could be wrong, regarding Space Marine 2. I mean, Space Marine 2 is a series that doesn't belong to Russia. The developers, Saber Interactive, also aren't from Russia, but the office that worked on it, as far as I know, is located in St. Petersburg, yes, and now they've just recently announced the third part. I'm personally very grateful to the publisher for deciding to push all of this, and to the developers, because the story is endlessly interesting.

And by the way, I haven't heard about it, I need to check it out. Warhammer, the Warhammer universe. Wow.

So we can draw a distinction then. We can distinguish. There are games that originated in Russia, run on Russian budgets, and the visionaries behind them are people from Russia. And they aren't necessarily located in Russia. So you can call them domestic studios, because many studios relocated, to places like Cyprus and so on. But they're still folks from Russia who grew up here and make games, having learned to make them here. And Saber, on the other hand, kind of works with European budgets, American budgets, with specialists from that field. Since they continue the franchises, they work for that market. But also, if you pay attention, a lot of Russian people from Russia work there. I'll go even further. We often see, for example, the source code of games made outside Russia, but it's always very clearly visible when a Russian team worked on it, just based outside Russia, versus a non-Russian team, in terms of the quality of the code that the game runs on, because we've seen completely different games. And it's safe to say that, in fact, developers from Russia really are in demand on the market, simply because of their skills.

So you just praised the Russian, like, school of development, right? Correct?

Well, it's really palpable, because, I mean, we port various games, and when you port them you really feel the pain from how poorly the original game was made. And it really is strongly noticeable when, for example, specialists from Russia worked on it versus specialists not from Russia.

I'd like to talk about the people who make games. Obviously there's a huge staff, all kinds of roles. Can you talk about what kinds of people work in game development and how it differs from developing other products?

Then can I start with the basics? For those who don't know how it's done, in principle game development can be compared to film. There's auteur cinema, which one person handles with a camera, walking around and filming. Essentially, in games it can be the same. If you're ready to take on the functions of programming, visual design, sound design, and so on, please, you can do it all alone. There are completely free engines, you can take any of them and make a game on it. Super. But the bigger the team, the more specialized each direction becomes. There's the audio direction, the visual direction, programming itself, bug catching, technical analysis. Then there are various additional kinds of testing. And if you're a truly cool studio, you can hire a special choreographer for the combat system. Or maybe do motion capture with a special dancer, and you'll see the actor transferred into the game world one-to-one. And that's wonderful. That very Kojima we mentioned a moment ago, just before this, often does that, recruiting Hollywood actors. If you're that cool a person, you'll need a bunch of different sub-specialists. But on the whole it's a creative direction, that is, the creative director is the technical director and, probably, the head game director of everything. Although maybe by then the specialization gets a bit different.

I'll clarify, are all engines really free?

Where, where, where, where... I'd say, read carefully the fine print with the asterisk in there.

Agreed. Important. Quick question. Listen, this is wildly interesting. The people who write scripts for games and the people who write scripts for series, films, Hollywood ones, conditionally, are those roughly the same people, or are they super different universes?

Different audiences, of course, and that's why a different approach is required. Yes, in games, unfortunately, not all games devote enough attention to the script, although it is undoubtedly important. In series, in many cases, if we're talking about Tarantino, everything rests on the dialogue, but in games, unfortunately, that's not always the case, alas.

But we should approach it from the other side: series, film, and games are slightly different directions altogether. In a series and in a film you watch from the outside, so to speak. In a game you're the main thing, you have a role and everything happens around you. And that's why for scriptwriters, among others, it's important, because you have different tools, you have to interact differently with the characters, because one of the characters is your protagonist. And so, naturally, yes, when a scriptwriter comes from film or series, if they're successful there, they might be very unsuccessful in games. Obviously.

Nikita, what about the development side, as they say?

It heavily depends on the company, heavily depends on what budget you're working with. We'll set aside indie, set it aside, because those are completely different games. There's always a visionary on the team. For example, even The Last of Us, the visionary was actually a writer, again, that is, not even the game director. He's not responsible for gameplay and so on. There are games where you can very strongly, clearly see the director's hand, because they're visually very colorful, and they sell on the visuals, not the gameplay, and so on. And then there's the standard set of teams, that is, the game design team, which can be just one person. Above them is a part called the game director. Well, again, it's always different. There may or may not be a creative director. It's a substance that also depends on the company. Some use it, some don't. The technical team, the testers, the rating designer. Well, in general, game production, even though it's considered a creative process, in reality, once the question of money, earnings, and business comes up, and once we've, roughly speaking, taken on investment and started developing the game, the creativity starts falling away. In AAA, yes, where you have a big cushion, a reserve, and so on, there's a lot of creativity, but in this, like, business model, of course, the creativity falls away, and it's already standard development. Just like, for instance, when we make a mobile app, we have a UI/UX designer, and there's a product person who searches for value, what we'll have the user do, what our app will do, and so on. In a game that role goes to the game designers, who define the gameplay UX specifically, how we'll interact with the mechanics and so on, but development on the whole doesn't differ.

And if we talk about the people who specifically write the code, are they generalists, or is there division inside there too?

I'll put it this way: even in ordinary development, that is, if a person went and studied to be a Python developer and they're a Python specialist, you can't call them a broad-profile programmer, because they know Python, for example, but another language is already hard for them. It's the same here. That is, there are people who came into game dev having genuinely learned an engine, they're decent specialists in the engine, they've reached the level of mid-level and develop all sorts of games, but give them a task in another engine, and they'll struggle. And then there are people who come into game development specifically from development. That is, they first learned the fundamentals, and for them there's no problem describing things in any technology, like, they bulked up, say, they finished, say, FCS, also learned Unreal, and went into game development. And such specialists, of course, are valued more, because they're more universal, you can switch them between different tasks, and you can give them R&D tasks, because, again, in game dev there's also a scientific direction, R&D.

Can you give some examples of R&D tasks? What might that be?

Well, for instance, when we were making a VR game, we had a hard task: how to make the most optimal pathfinding for the AI, pathfinding in 3D space. Because the engine's basic tools only provide 2D navigation, but we needed 3D navigation for the VR experience, which would also not load the processor too heavily, because, well, when we have 15 robots flying in the frame, I don't know, problems can arise with that. So if you give this task to someone who just took a "learn to develop games in 2 months" course and doesn't know the fundamentals of math and so on, because in fact this is a purely mathematical task, then naturally they'll handle it poorly. But when you have a developer who got the fundamentals, knows math well, understands all of this, understands optimization, how a computer works, naturally it's much easier for them to solve this task. Because they can come up with the method themselves, implement it, and so on.

And I'll also ask, you say you studied Unreal Engine, studied something else, right? But there are games where they develop their own engines. In what case does that have to be done?

Well, I'll even make a remark now: if you look, I think The Witcher is made on its own engine, but The Witcher 4, I think, is being made on Unreal Engine already. So they switched to a common engine. Many companies sit on their own engines because they were created a long time ago. And they just don't switch off them, because they have a core team that uses them. They work on these engines, and their engines are tailored to the games they make. That is, for example, games launched as a franchise, there's no point in them migrating to another engine. They have convenient functionality, they assemble the next game like with a construction kit. But when we talk about, when we're like a new company, naturally, it's always easier for you to take a ready-made engine, either Unreal or Unity, as the most popular ones. Obviously there are others, but we'll consider those two the mastodons of the market, depending on the tasks, and work with them, because making your own engine, well, look at VK with their Nau Engine, they've been making it for so long. It's been quite a while, and it still hasn't come out, because it's not VK's problem, it's the problem that an engine is a huge layer of work. Imagine, it's the toolset on which games are made, and that's physics, and rendering, and AI, and inputs. That is, it's really a big layer between the computer, low-level development, and the game itself.

I read somewhere that companies might also go into developing their own engine because using Unreal or something else is economically risky. Like, they could jack up the price, very steeply.

Or, you understand, leaving the house is risky too. A brick could fall on your head. When your game has an estimated cost, the development cost, of $200,000, you don't need to make your own engine. Because making an engine costs, like, tens of millions of dollars. So naturally it's easier for you to take a ready-made engine. So, I don't know, it seems to me that the trend now is more toward using available engines. Simply because when a company specializes in engine development, the engine turns out good. It's their direct focus. For you to make both a game and an engine, you need to keep two full-fledged teams that work on entirely different things. One team's focus is specifically the engine, the other thinks specifically about the game. Sure, it's a big investment, obviously.

Okay. And now I'd like to talk in more detail about some of the roles. So, to close out this topic about engine developers. Am I right in understanding that this is something close to systems programming already? That is, the code is quite low-level, you're optimizing some algorithms inside. So it's really a serious thing.

Well, yes, of course. Naturally, an engine is already... What is an engine in itself? An engine is a kind of framework, that is, a set of functionality that we use as the game developer. We don't have to think about how we'll get the signal that the player clicked the mouse. We just take it and say, if they clicked the mouse, do this. And the engine developers are responsible for getting the signal that the mouse was clicked and passing it on to someone else. So naturally, this level is, yes, already that of systems programming, systems development. Plus it's complex in the sense that, say, part of the engine is rendering. How to render correctly, the tools for optimizing that rendering. There's a huge number of them. It's important that the engine supports them. All of this is fairly serious, not even just development. For example, computer graphics really requires understanding algebra well, vector algebra specifically, if we're talking about... And if we're talking about artificial intelligence, well, developing bots, so to speak, also, yes. But we'll get to that.

That's the machine learning we...?

No, no, I'm not talking about machine learning. In games this is a bot, in fact, one that isn't controlled by the player, as it's called. It can be implemented with just an if-else, like, if you don't see the player, then just stand still. But naturally, yes, the engine is fairly low-level systems programming, I'd say. It's more C++, C, that is, more those kinds of languages.

Let's now talk about the applied developer, the one who makes a game on some ready-made engine, or uses what a neighboring team made. You said you have to learn the engine itself, ideally, understand how to use it and so on. What else? What other skills are necessary here?

Well, we'll make a distinction here. Again, if we're an indie developer, indie developers, oddly enough, are more often not programmers. There are indie developers who, well, a musician, he wanted to make his own game, he made his own game. But if we are talking specifically about a developer, like, a good one on an ordinary team, who really is a programmer and so on, then that's the engine and its tools, the development language that the engine supports. That is, for example, if it's Unity, that's C#, Unreal is Blueprints and C++. You should, ideally, master that. And then again, it depends on what profile of developer you want to be. If you just want to make a game, you don't need fundamental education, you want to earn 200,000–250,000, so you can learn an engine and be a good mid-level specialist. But if you want to actually do development specifically, the kind where you sit 24/7 solving these hard tasks, then of course you already need, again, we come back to math, you can't do development without math, unfortunately. Just a clarification on the math: because it's all geometry, you need to rotate vectors correctly, multiply matrices, and all of that, plus also abstract thinking. Basically, to understand how to solve one task or another, you need your logic to work well. And nothing trains logic like math problems. Again, by math I mean a broad layer, that is, like at FCS, math is many disciplines.

So you always factor in algorithms too, right?

Algorithms too, yes, naturally, it's important to understand data structures, because a big game always requires good optimization. How to do that, you also need to know. So naturally, there's a lot of knowledge here. So accordingly, you have a choice: either you go as a junior/mid specialist, or you go into high-level development, where you'll earn a lot of money. And there aren't as many such talents on the market as there are of the former.

And, actually, you mentioned artificial intelligence in games, right? But I have the feeling that games are, like, getting better, the graphics are cool and all, but these NPCs behaved dumbly and still do, yeah. Is that because it doesn't work out, or because you don't need too intelligent an opponent? I don't know.

It seems to me there's a small misconception here. Yes, of course, and in games it's not, in our decent understanding, a smart, developed computer that imitates a human. No, we consider an NPC in games first and foremost either as a standing character who does nothing, or one who reacts to the player's actions, or one who acts on his own regardless of the player's will. And now more and more games are arriving at NPCs becoming actual actors. That is, the world lives even without our participation in it. If we recall what it was like 15–20 years ago, we'd walk up to a character, talk to them, they'd give some basic lines, and that's it. Now we can stand in the middle of a city, life is going on all around us, and we realize that every character has, say, a scripted daily routine. And in that respect it's developing, of course, though it's not as good as we, lovers of realism and the embodiment of reality in video games, would like. Not yet. Unfortunately, that's not the case yet.

It's a bit the other way around here. If the AI plays much better than you, you won't play that game, because you'll lose, you'll get disappointed in yourself, so to speak, and leave. A game is, after all, about emotion, first and foremost about good emotion. It should arise in you, so that you want to keep playing.

Well, you know, this summer I decided to play the latest Civilization. Which one is it now, the fifth?

I think it's the seventh now, the previous one was the sixth.

So I was apparently playing the sixth. And, well, I played through it once, everything's fine. Then I started reading player forums, and there were a lot of discussions there that even at the most hardcore difficulty levels, your opponents beat you not because they have some super strategy, but because they just get showered with bonuses, building is cheaper for them. So, why not make an opponent who actually beats you strategically somehow?

There are such ones. I mean, again, it depends on the game we're making. If we're making some shooter, it's important for us not to overdo it, because naturally, given the modern development of machine learning algorithms and so on, we could make game bots that just kill absolutely everyone, walk around the map, and you, well, you're just walking and it lands a headshot on you. Not because it's using some cheats, no, but because it was trained that way. It just aims well. Fundamentally, you as a player will always be slower than the computer at processing information. Naturally, when you come up against each other, for you to take aim you have to jerk the mouse, and jerk it correctly with your hand, while for the bot it's all simpler. And that kind of thing won't be valued, simply because, well, it's not interesting. And it's not that it's interesting, like, a challenge appears, naturally, but here it's too big, and you realize, well, am I ever going to win? Why would I spend time on this game? Refund, Steam, off I go to buy the next game. And the developers get upset.

Okay. Well, that's all logical, I agree. And the second thing, machine learning is still used in games, it's actually used in many places, but specifically training full-fledged bots for, say, AAA games, where there are hundreds of bot types, like the same city dwellers and so on, that's a fairly hard task. Because, conditionally, say, take the city dwellers, it's important to simulate them so that they don't, for instance, bunch up into crowds. And that's a separate task, a whole layer in itself. How to make bot behavior such that they don't bunch up into crowds, because otherwise, well, you won't be able to get through. How to make them not crash into each other, but at the same time, you know, nimbly walk around each other, so to speak, dodge and so on. It's a hard task that requires, first, development, and second, training time too, plus not only algorithms but also an environment where all of this will happen and be trained. So it's a fairly big, hard task. OpenAI makes a lot of bots, for example, in Dota 2. And in the end the team of bots there beats the top teams in the world. But how long did they make it, and it's for one game. And imagine, for each game you have to do all of this anew. So naturally, it's a fairly expensive process.

By the way, I also heard that there's now a somewhat hyped topic, where there's a language model, like the same ChatGPT, and it controls the bots. That is, you write out a scenario for it in text, what does what, and it, like an agent, issues some commands. Is that something more niche, or not?

That exists too. It's just important to understand that when you issue a command to a bot, conditionally, say, "walk over, bending the body 45 degrees," it's important that you have the animation made for that, that your engine's tools allow you to do it, and so on. But actually, if you look at it, we're heading in that direction. For example, Unreal added flexible work with animations, where you can, right in the code while the game is running, turn a specific bone. They recently added a plugin that supports machine learning right inside the engine. So you can go into the engine, configure a model there and train it. So naturally, we're heading in that direction. It's just that, at some point we'll get there. We just need the toolset that allows me, as a company, to do something like that cheaply, not at scale. The toolset around it is changing, and when the toolset appears, naturally, this will get done. It's all like with LLMs, too. There just weren't tools for many years for them to be mass-market. And the compute, possibly.

Yeah. Yes. The cheap kind. And probably the last thing I'd like to talk about is, actually, how to break into this field. Of course, you can give general advice, but let's try something concrete: what course to watch, what book to read, what channel to subscribe to to stay in the loop. Share any advice with our listeners.

I, probably, as a non-specialist, will just start with the basics. Of course, I know this gets criticized by many, but if you're genuinely interested, just start by watching videos on YouTube. Just start with something simple. You'll quickly understand that there are different programming languages, and it's better to know... you can know one very deeply, or you can know a bit of everything. Depending on what's closer to you, you understand that this one is for this engine, this one for this engine, this one for this engine, and you'll realize, "I want to pick up a book." So you pick up a book, you take an author, you look, "Aha, he has a series of books on such-and-such engine, oh, on such-and-such programming language." You read it, please. So, on the whole, the main thing is your own personal desire to figure it out and understand that there's absolutely nothing impossible there. You can learn it yourself, but if you have specialists at hand who can help explain it to you, senior mentors, turn to them, and they'll explain everything to you much more accessibly.

And if, in general, you just want to stay up to date about games, about what's happening in the industry, what do you recommend reading?

Igromania, Kanobu.

Well, I was leading up to that, yes, thanks.

That would be very cool, but in general nowadays anyone can be a news author. Read both foreign journalists and Russian ones, so that'll be cool.

Nikita, what do you recommend?

Well, again, it's important to understand how... I just watched a video yesterday about how you can actually acquire any skill in 20 hours. The thing is, to become an expert you have to spend tens of thousands of hours. But fundamentally, to learn to, conditionally, play a basic... say, 2 hours, that's the example. It depends on what you want to do. And if we're just talking about getting into game dev in any position, then often you go through testing, through QA testers, because in general you don't need to have major skills. You can read up on guidelines, on what checklists are, how to test correctly, work through some basics, and go in as a tester. If someone wants to do game design, then there's a set of, like, classic game design literature that you read. And you need to play a lot of games for that, and try to get hired and grow your range of references, that's what it's called, yeah. And not "play games," but "expand your range of references." Well, we'll probably recommend some books later in the video description, yes. So it depends, because game dev is a huge number of specialists. If you want to go into management, that's also separate. To go into product in game dev, you first have to acquire the skills of a regular product manager and then get the additional specialization in game dev, again, that same range of references, figure it out. And as for developers, again, we gave the example, it depends on which kind you want to be. Naturally, if you want to be a cool developer, you should ideally go study somewhere, and it should be either full-fledged fundamental education or a set of courses. That is, not one course like "learn to make a game in one month," but a series, maybe a year or two years of active courses you take in parallel, but the most important thing, naturally, is practice in parallel. Without practice...

I'll clarify here: if you're already a developer, but want to specifically get acquainted with, say, Unreal Engine, is there some real classic for that?

Well, if you're just a developer, then it's enough to really just go for one of the quick, simple paths, sign up for some course, like some intensive, for example, there are a lot of them, the university [HSE] has some, there are some on other platforms, there are the same videos on YouTube from the Indian creators. Nobody got rid of those. And there are actually some pretty good videos there, oddly enough. There are books on Unreal too, like the same ones at FCS, for example, we even wrote one, I co-authored it, but the book is, you know, more like a reference manual, that is, it's cool to use it as an aid in addition to studying something else. But fundamentally, when you have the fundamentals, mastering a tool is no problem for you. That is, conditionally, if I'm a good backend developer in Java, I can become an equally good backend developer in C# just by working in that language for a month or two. In quotation marks, obviously, what I'm saying. Same thing with an engine. If I'm a good developer, I know how it works, then mastering a new program for me requires either a good course, or sitting down, digging through the documentation for a couple of months yourself, building a couple of projects. That's it, I've kind of mastered the engine, and then it's always about experience. Starting isn't hard. What's hard is specifically reaching expert level, but mastering basic skills is always easy. If you're not a developer at all, then there are nuances, because to become a developer on an engine, you first have to become a developer in general. Well, no, that part is clear by now.

And the last question. When you're studying to be someone in the film industry, as far as I know, there's a certain set of films that you're obligated to watch. Those are the milestones in the film industry, right? And when you start doing game development, game design, is there also a set of games that you're obligated to play? Like, what exactly?

It's a matter of what you like. But if we're talking about single-player games, The Last of Us, the Uncharted series; shooters, that's Doom; and strategies, that's Civilization and Heroes of Might and Magic.

That's interesting. I mean, The Last of Us is quite recent. Doom is, well, what, the nineties? So there's quite a spread.

There's both the old version of Doom and the modern version of Doom. And The Last of Us is just very good from a story standpoint. If we're talking about story, really about story, that's Fallout, Gothic, and a bunch of stuff that isn't usually mentioned, but there's really a lot of good there, actually, if you dig into it. Nikita, do you have anything to add here?

Well, I'll agree that it depends on what you want to do. That is, if you want to make mobile games, say, free-to-play, naturally you need a good range of references. Then you should basically just open the top of the most popular games, see what they're making now, and draw from them what they're doing, how they're doing it, why they're doing it, try to understand it in order to come up with a better solution for yourself. If you're, say, a game designer, and want to work on some big, interesting, story-oriented game, then naturally you need to go into games, play games like The Last of Us and so on. If you, conditionally, want to make a shooter with some strategy and so on, then it's the Front... games and shooters of that level, with complex models. So it depends on what you want to do.

Great, thank you so much. You've thrown out a lot of advice. I think we'll then attach some books, articles, courses, maybe, in the description. We wish our listeners good luck if they want to break in, and to play more good games. Thank you so much.

Thank you, everyone. Bye.
