"What kind of job do you have to take to actually do that? Because you got paid money for it—they just assigned grades, and you're hardly going to find some more or less interesting, substantive job that wouldn't, you know, drag you headfirst into this awful world of ours. Please, let's scrape something." Without really switching my brain on, I came up with some very complicated scheme—but I thought it seemed reasonable. And a student, in principle, wants to maximize his results and minimize his effort, and that's how I teach.

[music]

Hi everyone! This is another episode of the podcast "The Cozy FCS Corner," where we talk about computer science. Here at the Faculty of Computer Science at HSE, we're pretty good at training specialists—developers, data scientists, analysts, and so on. But today, just as English once became something everyone has to know, not just professionals, today computer science is becoming something everyone has to understand at least a little. And today that's exactly what we're going to talk about. Our guests are Ilya Samanenko, deputy dean of our faculty for academic and educational affairs, and Maksim Karpov, our instructor who is almost finished with his PhD, a staff member of the Big Data Analysis Laboratory. Hello! Hi!

Let's first discuss—what do you think, why were you invited to talk about how to teach everyone these digital skills? Ilya, why do you think you were invited? Well, probably because I myself have actually had to teach, on multiple occasions, all sorts of things related to computers to people who are generally quite far from computer science. That is, in my practice I've taught both humanities students and schoolchildren who would later become computer people but hadn't yet decided. Humanities students—how on earth did you end up there? Well, this was back in the days when I worked at MSU; the faculty was the Higher School of Contemporary Social Sciences. And there I taught higher mathematics and what was called computer science. So it really was an interesting experience, and it was certainly important to motivate the students and somehow explain to them what this was all about, why we'd gathered.

Maks, how do you relate to this? I have a similar story of how I started teaching students in technical fields. And actually I have an interesting chapter in my life: my first degree was in international relations, and then I crossed over to the dark side—to data science. And so I feel all the pain and the problems that humanities students experience, whether they're economists or journalists. I find common ground with them quite effectively, and we overcome various problems. Very interesting. Tell us briefly anyway—why did you decide to switch from international relations to IT? At some point I met some guys from MIPT—I didn't even know there was such a university back then—and they told me about machine learning. They were studying at the School of Data Analysis at the time, and it was just gaining momentum in the early 2010s, and I got really interested. I decided I wanted to do machine learning too. But what about international relations? You'd prepared for it, spent loads of years on it. Yeah, but no—I always actually liked math in school. So when I was choosing, when I applied to MSU, I wanted to do something at the intersection of economics, history, and foreign languages—that was exactly international relations. But then during my studies it seemed to me that the IT side was closer to me than international relations specifically. Got it, okay.

Well, let's get started then. So at HSE there's been a project for about five years now—Data Culture—which we've all been a bit involved in. It's a project about teaching all bachelor's students what we call digital skills: programming, digital literacy, data analysis—absolutely everyone. Now, that's a debatable point. If you tell, say, a schoolkid who's about to go study philosophy that they're going to study Python, they might be a little confused about what we're trying to do. Do you have any examples from your experience where these very digital skills came in handy for a non-IT, non-technical person? We're listening.

There are actually a lot of such examples. And right away, you know, the question is: what skills are we talking about? I mean, some basic skills, like Googling—that's a skill too, and so far it isn't something we're born with. But you do need to do something to learn it. Of course, hand on heart, let's say strong, advanced schoolkids generally already know how. It would be hard to survive in a modern school otherwise. But it's another matter that the depths of the internet are boundless, and learning to use them effectively is simply a necessary condition for survival, for good studies—it doesn't matter whether at HSE or any other university. And you can hardly find some more or less interesting, substantive job that wouldn't drag you headfirst into this awful IT world of ours. And then it's really just a question of, well, like there's a course called "life safety basics"—this is your safety and survival. It's another matter that of course some new tasks come up that really are connected to things arising. Okay, we say "big data"—well, that's a whole debate of ours: how big is big. But it's just some information that needs to be structured, collected, and so on. You can try to do it, conditionally, in Word, dragging paragraphs of text up and down, some figures. You can do it in a more advanced way with an Excel spreadsheet—almost everyone can manage that, somehow cleverly filtering, getting a new spreadsheet that's somewhat non-trivial. But if you can actually write some script—again, it doesn't matter—say in Python, a programming language that lets you do it, and then pull out something substantive, that simply puts you above your colleagues who can do this to a lesser degree. So I'd say it's about not drowning in the flood of information that comes at you—and it comes at you online, in any field.

An example from your work—I know you sit in Jupyter notebooks all the time. What do you do? Yes, yes. So I have a large amount of work as deputy dean, and, well, for example, everything related to various kinds of grade analysis. And there's also such a distinction here—you could tell all sorts of things about this. So when, say, we want to make certain environments to understand which students are stronger and which are weaker—that's one story, simple spreadsheets, relatively speaking. But sometimes there's a need to look at certain interrelationships. For instance, take students who do great in one discipline but poorly in another. If there are many such students, and there's such a correlation, then the question is really about the students themselves—are they all just slackers, or maybe it's a problem with the discipline itself, something's wrong in it, something to fix, maybe talk to the instructor. So that's how it happens. And there were various fun situations when I was analyzing disciplines like that. For instance, to build—to write some, well, basically clunky code, even a small machine learning model, then to build it, train it, and the result was a kind of map, like a starry sky of disciplines. There were disciplines that ended up close together, that were actually of completely different subject matter, but turned out to be very close by the grades. Why is there something so alike in them—almost 60% there, sort of stuck together? You have to sort that out. So, for instance, for that you have to write a lot of such code, even though it would seem to be purely administrative work.

Yes, I'd like to add, coming back to the topic of when the courses we teach came in handy for our students—I have two vivid examples. For instance, on the Media Communications degree program, after the Data Analysis in Python course, we usually give students feedback forms where they tell us about their impressions of our course and whether they use the skills they've acquired. And here's a rather everyday example: a student shared that she was able to build a table in pandas—pandas is a library for analyzing tabular data—analyze the expenses and income of the family budget, so to speak, and helped her mom coordinate further actions in that regard. It was told really sweetly. The second example: in the Python courses we sometimes give students bonus assignments to write a Telegram bot, and in particular one student really wants to get into entrepreneurship. He created a bot for orders in a store—or rather, in a café—where, by selected photos and price, you can determine an order and, for example, order home delivery, what products you'd like delivered. So that's a Telegram bot you can also use. I know someone who wrote a bot to track when items in a particular store go on discount and order them immediately. That's also about automation.

We've started talking about Python. So on our Applied Mathematics and Computer Science program, the older students choose elective courses. And, well, there's a scientific approach to how to distribute them across these courses, because demand for some is high. Students have, say, a grade point average, a ranking—you can use it, there's a proper approach to how to do it: rank by rating and so on, enroll the more... academic, the program director. And back then I sort of forgot to think it through, so without really switching my brain on I came up with some very complicated scheme—but I thought it seemed reasonable. I spent a couple of days programming an algorithm that would distribute everyone. I wrote it, hopefully without bugs, everyone was happy, and I liked it so much that I now give students in the machine learning course a homework assignment where they have to efficiently program this algorithm in pandas, without loops, without all that. They hate this homework—it's very hard. But that's also an example of automation, right?

Okay. So far you've given pretty everyday examples—like building some spreadsheet, doing calculations. But now lots of professions are appearing that are sort of "tech-this" or "this-tech." HSE is opening programs about this. Do you have any stories on this score, about how you taught students who work at the intersection of computer science and a subject area? Well, let me start—I mostly teach on programs that aren't related to computer science. I was just recalling yesterday: over the three years I've been teaching, I've taught on eight different educational programs in total—economics, journalism, media communications. And in particular, on media communications we had a project seminar where students analyzed data in their own subject area, that is, related to media—they did news analytics. They had various topics related to economics, culture, politics, and so on. Applying the methods we'd taught them for text analysis, they were able to apply them and build various visualizations—word clouds, calculate statistics. So it really turned out to be interdisciplinary research for them.

Well, but what kind of job do you have to take to do that for money? They just assigned grades. In particular, for example, at the TASS news agency there are even separate departments that do data analytics in media. That is, you need specialists who can visualize and present data. There's a separate story related to data-driven storytelling, and now there are even disciplines appearing that let students, once they've learned these skills, get successfully employed—it'll set them apart advantageously compared to other students who haven't studied such disciplines.

I'd like to add about employment. Of course, truth be told, if you're at some more or less large firm, a big enterprise, then as a rule there are teams, and in teams there are specialists of different profiles—there are programmers, data scientists. And here's another reason why it's really important for humanities [music] students of different fields to immerse themselves in our computer worlds, simply so that they can later somehow speak the same language with other team members. Because here there really can be problems. That is, you might have a person who, say, understands journalism well—a good, professional journalist, a writer—and there's some, you know, somewhat gruff, slightly bearded programmer, and they've been put on a team: "Come on, let's make something cool." They'll spend half a year just finding common ground. And in that sense, it's important that the journalist has at least some understanding of what can in principle be done—say, they won't do it with their own hands, but they understand at least the option that it's in principle solvable—and then there's much less friction. And as for those who are pure techies, the programmers, of course it's important that they have some, well, broad background, so that they understand at all that there can be, well, some informally posed situations—not "here's the given, solve it," but, generally speaking, a situation where there's an expert who somehow describes it to you, and then you have to pick it up. That, I think, is important—it's a communicative thing, very important. That's also what shapes... well, yes, speaking the same language. Agreed.

And by the way, another point I think is very important is being able to do some things yourself rather than bothering the professionals. That is, roughly speaking, you work at a company, there are some databases—writing some SQL query, drawing some charts and using—that's what Maks and I have been discussing, including this in a course on something like business analytics, visualization systems—because, well, you'll really just sit down yourself, not torment anyone, and do it. Whereas if there's a developer who studied this for, I don't know, six years, and you come up and say, "well, pick out all the rows where the salary is..." yeah, yeah—you'll be there driving them nuts, distracting them. Well, you'll do it faster yourself. It's really like in English—you read and write a letter yourself rather than going to a translator. Same here.

But nonetheless, you've raised an interesting topic. When I talk with various educational programs, they often say, "Okay, fine, you've convinced us that it's needed in general, but we think we need to raise our students—economists, managers—to be professional task-setters. Why have them program? You teach them how to set the task, and then the programmers do the programming." How do you think—is it even realistic to teach them to understand this area without immersing them in it? No, no—you can only set a task if you've at least solved some little problems yourself. Because how do you do it otherwise? It would still be just some, I don't know, idle chatter, so to speak. If you teach it that way, what's the point? No, of course you need some basic skills—only when you understand in principle how it works. There are some key code structures, things like loops—that's one of the difficulties, that the libraries necessarily do this—what there is, in principle, that there's some model that in principle can be trained in, I don't know, two lines, and it'll somehow work. But if more serious training is required, you can turn to someone who understands it better. But some simple models you definitely need to be able to make yourself. Luckily it's actually very easy—I mean really, it might be more or less three lines, maybe without understanding the depths of what's happening in them, but it works in principle. And it really did work—that's of course important, that it passed through your own hands.

I think I have a slightly different point of view—that at the upper levels we can teach managers, executives, to set tasks for a team of data scientists and analysts. We have a whole course that we teach in continuing education—"Data Science for Executives"—we train product managers for analytics. So I agree that at the low level, when you need a specific model, to look at how to tune the parameters, such employees will probably have difficulties with that. But at the upper level, when they understand that there's, for example, a class of tasks that needs to be solved either for classification or for regression, when they know some business metric that needs to be optimized, improved—so in that respect I think you could... they write or you just explain that there are these metrics. There are exactly such courses—maybe you can share? Yes, listen, actually there are two stages when we run such intensives for executives from corporations. First we tell them, in a kind of lecture format: "Look, there's machine learning, there are these kinds of tasks, here's how it works, that's cool, and that's why everyone is hiring data scientists—turns out you can automate this, optimize that." But it's still a kind of black box in their heads—they think, "well, these are some gods, conditionally, who sit there, they know math and something else." And then the practice starts, and we say, "Let's look at Python, let's write something simple here, a little script—say, to generate some letters. And now let's take some data, let's load it into pandas, train a little model." It can really be done in four sessions. Of course, after this they won't make such a thing themselves, but at least they'll touch it with their hands during this time, and after that they have a request like, "So listen, turns out this isn't hard to do. So why did mine spend a couple of months training a model like this? So why do I have ten people doing this?" Actually, often such teams are too large. So indeed, when you touch it with your hands, it's just a completely different perspective. Well, of course, there are certainly some people with super-developed abstract thinking who listen to a lecture, build it all up in their heads, and they understand perfectly. But the majority need to touch it, get the experience—there I agree. Well, luckily for that you need, like, 10–20 lines and it'll really work, which is very cool. Yes, yes, yes—that's the main advantage of modern languages, Python in particular.

Okay, here's another interesting question. It's somehow turned out that within Data Culture the courses are mainly taught by our instructors from the Faculty of Computer Science. Well, Maks, for your sake—it would seem, although yes, our instructors don't understand the subject area. But with you we got lucky, you understand something from international relations. But mostly they're not journalists, not lawyers, not linguists, and so on. Why do you think that is? Are we doing something wrong, that we can't manage to attract subject specialists in most cases? Or is that really how it should be—that a data scientist teaches people from other fields without understanding what tasks they have? Any opinions? I think it's a natural process. That is, when we invite instructors, we mainly look at graduates. When the project was just starting, it was hard for us to find instructors, so we mainly invited people from our faculty. But now a generation of students has grown up—graduates of our courses—and many students express a desire to take part in our Data Culture project too and teach these courses. And that's exactly where we get a great opportunity to combine their subject knowledge, which they gained studying on their own educational program, with the Python and data analysis they learned in our courses. The second thing is that we're starting to attract experts from various educational programs—in particular, for example, instructors who originally did data analytics, data visualization in journalism; we survey them. Or, for example, psychologists who invite us to advise on how exactly to introduce data analysis courses. So when this kind of communication between different teams happens, that's where great opportunities arise.

But do you have courses where you teach and there are people with a non-specialized, non-computer education? Oh yes, for example, this spring semester I'll continue teaching the Data Analysis course that I originally started in 2019, and instructors will join me who completed this course on the World Economy program—that is, they already know their subject area well, and with them we'll be able to discuss how we can introduce more project-based activities that students will like. They'll actually be teaching the seminars? Yes, yes.

Okay, maybe you can share some tricks you've developed for non-specialized students? Well, probably they shouldn't be courses where you derive theorems on the board with chalk. How do you get these students interested? On the other hand, that's actually a real question. This is a certain conviction of mine that I'm prepared to defend and explain and so on. In principle, if we say that an instructor of, conditionally, programming or math is going to teach humanities students, or vice versa—say some humanities scholar teaches philosophy or, I don't know, history to mathematicians and programmers—this person, it seems to me, will be successful if they're really at least somewhat interested in the field that the students are studying. That is, they should show at least some inner interest—maybe though, even if they're a super expert in their own field, in this one they don't really need to understand it deeply, but at least it should be interesting to study what it's all about—that is, more than the school course they had on this topic, to immerse themselves a bit in the world their students live in. And then, it seems to me, fairly naturally they adapt to the students, adapt to their language, and accordingly to their, well, models of thinking, and then their examples land better, and they more solidly build common ground and everything else.

But if I talk about my own experience—well, yes, I taught sociologists. There the course was more related to math, analysis. And there it's rather that there's a certain advantage in giving simply more vivid examples—that is, to show that, say, the same math or computer... well, it's not some thing in itself. And from recent years, what phrase could you use to immediately grab everyone's attention? I won't go far—it was literally last week. I'm currently teaching an elective on programming for economists. They have an assignment in Python too—to program some matrices, classes, all the rest. To draw them into the topic, to say something about programming, I say, "Well, look, who likes matrices? Nobody likes matrices. Everyone likes kittens. Let's study programming on the matrices we need for our homework—on kittens." Well, of course it might not be connected to economics, but it immediately focuses attention, it lifts the mood, and all that. And sometimes you really do have to find some connections—they may even come out a little artificial, but nonetheless they work in principle. Say, I don't know, when you were talking about a system of linear equations—you'd say it's the simplest topic, and where do you even start—well, I managed to connect it with a certain reformulation, with a certain task of communication on strategic questions. That is, how can you expand expert opinion in a survey—as a certain system, say, a slightly artificial, slightly toy thing, but still, "Look, here's such a task, let's solve it." So those kinds of things are cooler too, because you have to feel something in the area the students live in.

I'd say our courses are really very applied. Actually, we usually start from some tasks that might interest the students. For example, for economists, to explain the topic of scraping and then analyze data, we gave them a really pressing problem, a task—for example, finding an apartment to rent. They want to rent an apartment in Moscow, so let's scrape and look at the characteristics of an apartment that interest them—they need a certain district, distance from the metro, rental price, and so on. And students find this interesting because, first, they may want to carry out this task in the near future, and second, on this example we show exactly how data is scraped and how we can analyze it. And in principle I'd also highlight that for students in non-technical fields it's very important to give lots of examples right away, to motivate them as to why this is needed. Because, for example, FCS students have very well-developed abstract thinking—you can immediately give them a theorem and its proof, and not everyone will get it right away, but you don't need a lot of detail. For humanities students it works a bit differently—a few more examples, like how machine learning learns from precedents, and then the students understand the concept.

Listen, from your experience—you teach a lot of these non-technical students—isn't it the case that, say, an international-relations student who's currently a freshman doesn't yet understand himself what international relations even is, so it's rather strange to give him examples from the subject area? Well, here I can't advise very well, because our course is in the second and third year—they already understand. Digital literacy is in the first year. Let me also explain for the listeners: we have three tracks—Data Culture: digital literacy, programming in Python, and data analysis. Data analysis comes last, after the two blocks of those courses, and so, yes, the student arrives more or less aware and understands what tasks they'd like to apply data analysis to.

You were talking about giving examples, giving projects from their own field—all clear. And something popped into my head. There's been this idea lately that maybe grades aren't needed—that you should give students pass/fail rather than torment them. Again, well, probably for our own students, the specialized ones, when we teach them, grades are important among other things to rank them, so that we can later somehow understand who to work with and how. But still, say, when we teach humanities students programming—maybe there's no need to grade them. What do you think? Have you had any such experiments? No, we haven't had such experiments. On the contrary, I think there should be a grade. That is, a student—it doesn't even matter, humanities or any other, doesn't matter, programming or anything else—should very clearly feel that their effort is actually being taken into account somehow. Of course, you could do it the strange way where their, I don't know, seminar participation, homework, midterms are taken into account, accumulating a certain threshold—you crossed it, so you pass. But that seems a bit strange to me, because if you've already graded so very much, why then reduce it to a kind of binary situation? After all, students are, how to put it, very sensitive about how they're graded. All the more so since in a pass/fail situation—what does "fail" mean, like a "2" (an F)? That you did absolutely nothing? Did nothing—yes, but everyone else was doing things, and it turns out we conditionally don't distinguish a "C-minus" from an "A-plus." That's also bad—first and foremost it's bad for both groups. An "A-plus," because they tried so hard and in the end their efforts aren't recognized at all; and "C-minus"—it's like, "well, good enough, I cleared the minimum, so I'm already great." No, comrade, you're not great.

So at HSE we don't only teach our own students all this; we also actively work with other universities. Ilya, you're actively involved in this—can you tell us a bit about it? I can say a lot about it, but I won't go on at length, as they say. On this topic, there really is a serious problem. And I'd even say it's not some HSE problem, not even an all-Russian problem, because it's really a kind of global problem. And here's the thing: if we talk about the scientific world, then in principle it's clear how knowledge is accumulated and exchanged there—we write papers, we read papers, we go to conferences. That is, scientists all over the world, or scientists within Russia, understand what others are doing, and we somehow understand how to adopt others' experience. It's good that we adopt it and then improve ourselves further. But if we talk specifically about teaching, about higher education—because in schools it's different, there it's to some degree much better established—but basically there's no communication between instructors at different universities. Everyone lives, conditionally, confined to their own department, one chair—these kinds of cells. And how to somehow exchange experience—how do you actually do it?

A couple of years ago we held a conference; I ran a survey of the instructors—a conference for instructors. I literally did it live online and asked just two questions. First, I asked: "Dear colleagues, have you had to dig around on other instructors' websites to find at least something useful for yourself?" And about 80%, even more, said yes, they had. That was the first question. The second question was: "Are you willing to share some of your own materials that you have—for free?" And about 78% said yes, they're willing. So there's demand on both sides, so to speak: you want to get something, and you have something to give. And actually the problem is that this communication somehow needs to be set up. And our various activities are actually connected with making this communication happen—done in different ways. Right now we have a conference scheduled for November. We run professional development courses specifically related to wanting to teach something new. You can't have 10 people from different universities, all different ages, different backgrounds, with topics that are equally useful and interesting to everyone—so we offer them lots and lots of different materials, sort of without saying "this is the package being offered to everyone"; rather, take what seems interesting and useful for the classes you personally teach. We prepare materials, we invite our instructors who tell how they conduct these themselves, and accordingly we work in that genre, and it turned out to be really in demand. Over the past year now, in total almost 700 instructors will have gone through it. That actually shows very great interest. Is this mostly from the regions or from Moscow—these instructors? Mostly from the regions, yes, various universities. To tell you—literally this week another such course is running, 300 instructors. Actually I want to say a big thank you to the AI Alliance—an alliance of major corporations that funds this work; thanks to their support it largely came together. They themselves determine which universities the instructors come from. Right now it's around 50 universities and around 300 instructors on this new module.

Have you happened to teach for these instructors? That's exactly why I invited Maks—he'll be brought into the work too. Have you taken part? Yes, yes. Great. Teaching specifically other instructors—training instructors—no, this will be my first experience. But I have taught adult learners. That is, I also teach in our FCS Center for Continuing Education—courses in Python and machine learning—and that audience also requires a special approach. You need to treat the learners very carefully and supportively, since unlike our students they already have time constraints: some have families, some work full-time. And on top of that, if a learner is encountering programming for the first time, then for them of course it's also a big challenge, and you also need to introduce everything very carefully. And what kind of background do the people who come there have—are they more IT people or more anything-at-all? Anything at all. I've heard from the manager of our center that even baristas and actors come to retrain—to retrain into Python, into data analysts. There were such really interesting cases. And successfully, or are they still studying? Yeah, it seems successfully—that is, they finished and got employed. Cool.

Something I also can't help asking: you mentioned Python. We really do teach Python everywhere—we tell instructors at other universities how to teach Python; in Data Culture we teach Python to all our bachelor's students. Maybe we're wrong here—there are tons of other such languages you can also write scripts in: there's R, now there's Julia developing. Why Python? Do you have any convictions here? Well, it seems to me Python is the industry standard. I mean, there's C, C++ and the like—well, let's be honest, Python is simpler. The entry barrier compared to C++ is much lower. A student can already, literally in the second or third session, write a simple algorithm, use loops and conditionals, and already see a result. For C++, I think, by the time you connect the necessary modules with their specific syntax and implement them, the desire to study it has already faded—for a humanities student.

As for R, that's a good point, because for example at the Psychology faculty they're adherents of the R language and they don't want to switch to Python. And we try to accommodate such educational programs—we hear their requests and, for example, keep data analysis in R, and that way they adapt to taking the independent exams. Like, is it just historically how it turned out for them, or are the tools more convenient? Do you understand the reasons? It's both. That is, originally the work was implemented in R, and all the statistical packages are also conveniently implemented in them. But in general you can do it in Python too. With sociologists, somehow it didn't take off—there were some programming basics, sort of just logical ones.

As for Python—well, it's what you might call a matter of the times of the industry. Right now, on one hand it's the convenience of the language, on the other hand the abundance of libraries you can use right out of the box. And, let's say, here's a question: what comes next? For a person who's now, say, starting to learn Python, what trajectories, what inclinations are there next? Python lays down—well, thanks to Python, let's say, you can form certain basic things of algorithmic thinking in general. And then of course you can develop further—say, study C. But then there will be a certain kind of pain, it seems to me, when you switch to the other side. At least, some things—strict typing, the volume of code you need to do the same thing: "why was it so complicated? You'd have three lines, but then your three lines work just as fast—the same thing in 3 seconds"—just as the reverse, switching from a strict language like... I, for instance—actually that was a timely trajectory for me. I also think, "wait, hold on, you have to strictly declare a variable somehow, and where's all the rest?" Yeah, and Sanya here launched it in three lines—and where's the .exe file, where the interpreter just runs it. In general, because honestly, you know, you can't guess—you have to start from any case; if it was useful to listen, no matter, more than... because it's another thing to seriously get into it. Well, yes, it's as if it's like mastering different languages, foreign ones—being able to speak one, well done; speaking another, that's super. Reminds me how at school in computer-science class we'd start with block diagrams, draw them for a long time—schemes, yeah—then program on them, and then some languages already. That's probably an option too.

Coming back to the topic of universities: HSE now does quite a lot of these joint programs—for example, with Tyumen State University and many others. As a person who communicates with instructors from other universities, does this really bring any benefit—these joint programs? What does it give students, in your view? Well, here, how to say, there are many beneficiaries in such stories. If we talk about students studying at some regional university, then the opportunity to study on a joint program of course greatly enriches the student's options. Because, unfortunately, it happens that programs don't get updated much—the instructor more or less built the course the same way they built it 10 or even 20 years ago; new students came, and they were told the same thing. What's the problem with that, you ask? Well, the problem is that even an established course—say, in calculus, some things that were absolutely the same as they are now—still needs to be updated. And what's the incentive for that? Here's an incentive, for example: we, the administration, add a new discipline to the existing program, and how should instructors react to that? Actually, the fact that modernization really happens—HSE shows up with its new programs almost every year; something even changes within a year, while I haven't changed anything here in 20 years. Is that right or wrong, generally? On one hand... On the other hand, we don't just implement our own programs and disciplines with them—we actually hand over materials and teach them how to teach, or how to work with these materials—which is exactly what I was talking about, the same story. And of course it's useful, because, well, it's a kind of conditional gift for them: you suddenly got something new, thanks to which it's really easier for you to conduct your own classes. So I think both students win and instructors win. And actually it's important for HSE too, because these new contacts, so to speak, also let us look at ourselves from the outside. On one hand, we make certain proposals; we think it's good, interesting, so cool. But when you start doing a joint program, you suddenly see, "listen, yeah, it seemed cool, but somewhere something's off—let's figure out why it's off." And you get additional feedback, which is always useful, which can always be used to fix things.

When we introduce such courses in other universities, the lectures are our recorded online courses, and the seminars are taught by local instructors. And we use the online courses in our own Data Culture disciplines too. There's now quite a lot of both negativity and positivity about this—"online courses are rubbish, learning should only be in person," or "it's fine." How, in your experience, do disciplines that use online courses go over? Now, it seems to me, we've already arrived at the hybrid format being the most preferable. That is, when we provide students with part of the video materials to watch online—and this saves their time in the sense that they can always rewatch some moment that's unclear to me—but also necessarily in-person interaction, when a student can come to a seminar and ask their question to the instructor on the spot. And in exactly that kind of symbiosis, when we combine both online materials and the in-person format, students achieve more success. Why more—more compared to what, fully in-person? Even seriously, why is that? It seems to me a student in principle wants to maximize their results and minimize their effort. [laughter] If it's in person, the student is probably coming from the dorm beyond Odintsovo—it's very hard for them to get there, whereas watching the video on YouTube optimizes the time nicely. But you'd think—well, you come to a live lecture, a superstar lecturer shows up and tells things, you can ask questions, you can come up afterward—you lose that telling-fairy-tales thing, you know. There are two or three nerds who pester the lecturer from the first session, and there 98% of them are barely jotting something down, or just—no phone—well, not that... You can put the lecture on YouTube, that's cool, especially cool that you can play it at, like, the fastest speed. They say every instructor has a speed coefficient at which we can speed them up and still understand everything—the main goal is for it not to be 1.0, then you're doing great. Too much would be too much. The chance to watch a moment again, to plan your time somehow, is great. But of course, seminar sessions should still be in person—contact matters there, and those black little windows in Zoom... everyone has had their fill of that here, and probably there's no reason at all to go back to it. As for the lecturer being a star—well, look, they're a star in any case; you watched the recording, but you can still attend, and if you want to meet them somewhere, you can talk to them. So no—this kind of hybrid story, at least, at least the fact that we record the lectures, the fact that we then publish them—that's important. If people want to come, let them come, good for them, sitting in the front row by the lecturer, good for them. But you have to make the effort so that all the content remains and you can watch it later, say before exams. Yeah, that's true.

I do read my lectures this year sort of in the auditorium, but at the same time I both stream and record them, and indeed, first, it's a big stream, about 300 people, of which about 120 attend the lectures—60 in the auditorium and 60 connecting online—and the rest watch, and really watch. I have quite a lot of examples of students I've never seen anywhere, neither online nor in person, but they study terrifically well, pass everything, ask some smart questions, then go on to be teaching assistants, and say it's more comfortable for them. And some are real machines—they say, "I put your lecture on at 2x and program something for homework in parallel, and I have a super-productive time." I don't understand how that's possible. On YouTube there are these so-called lectures for falling asleep—on the contrary, you'd want to keep your eyelids open.

Again, Maks—you teach a lot of this kind of thing—do you have to update the online courses, or is it "we recorded it and it just runs"? No, naturally we update them periodically based on feedback. That's when we need, for example, to add a new topic that wasn't there before. For instance, analysis of variance was needed for the psychologists—we discussed it recently. And we also see, for example, that somewhere there might be small typos, and we fix those too in the lecture notes. So it's a living organism, it's constantly being updated. Moreover, there's a constant request for new online courses, to expand and supplement the existing ones. And you'll say—why is it important to record? It's also important to then look at yourself from the outside; I really love that. Well, what can you do—sorry, but you have to. The first time I taught—no, seriously—okay, so actually this is a very important thing. Purely for your own development of teaching, of yourself as an instructor, to look at yourself from the outside. And especially with the courses I... I mean, with all these stories, I've been recording for two years now, and I see—the same topic, how it is now versus before—you see the changes. Well, okay, at least now I'm not ashamed. The first time it was like that.

Toward the end, let's maybe do a little visioneering. We've already discussed that everyone needs to be taught digital literacy—how to Google, how to use programs, programming—clear why. Data analysis—yes, it comes up everywhere. But that's something we've sort of already learned to do; clearly a lot can be improved, but okay, we can do it. So what's next? Surely something will come up soon that everyone—absolutely everyone, all the bachelor's and master's students—will need to be taught. Do you have ideas, maybe even the boldest ones, about what the next thing will be—I mean apart from data science? Well, yes, you know, someone smart—I don't remember who—there was a phrase somewhere, but it didn't... so: the 20th century was the century of IT, of technology, and the 21st century will be the century of biotechnology. So maybe something—well, I don't know, I'm completely... I don't understand anything about biology—but probably something about, well, these sciences about the human being, what's connected with us in general, some kind of, how to say, careful attitude toward yourself, ultimately—how to relate carefully, in a broad sense, to other people. Probably that's exactly what will be the important skills for the 21st century.

A friend of mine told me that computer science had its big bang when you, a real geek, sit there, you're interested, you can buy yourself a computer at home, start soldering something inside it, unscrewing something, installing some compiler, programming something—and that's when it really started to develop, because in fact many modern technologies were invented by these geeks who tinkered with something in their garage and invented things. And then he said that now a time is really beginning when you can do something similar regarding your own health. First, all sorts of articles about evidence-based medicine have become widely available, where you can read that, like, if you take vitamin D, then... and there will be a ton of these completely safe supplements available—you can do biohacking; a ton of devices where you can measure something about yourself and track your own dynamics depending on how you exercise. So maybe it really, really will go in that direction.

I'll also add—I discussed this question with a couple of acquaintances too, and they said that maybe the next stage—not quite everywhere, but close to computer science—is what's called human–computer interaction. That is, some new ways for a person to interact with the computer—some VR or whatever. Well, it's doubtful whether this will have any future, but maybe it'll go in that direction. Any other ideas? Maybe I'd want to discuss slightly more down-to-earth examples. Actually, right now skills related to mental health are becoming more and more important, given the various difficulties and pressures students face. That is, often it would be great for students to hear some basic things related to how to properly plan their work tasks, that it's in principle okay if you don't manage everything and shouldn't stress too much about it—some basic skills related to self-reflection, to health, would be useful too. I think there's a big demand for this among students. By the way, yes, that's true. But here we're talking more about some soft skills. Is there something hard, technical, you see that we don't teach but should? Well, the near future will show—various robots, drones will walk around, and we already need to talk about ethics: how to coexist with this, that artificial intelligence is already here with us and we need to understand what challenges and difficulties arise with it.

This topic again—well, about human–computer interaction, specifically human-with-human but through the computer, conditionally—you can also bring that up: how much, in fact, you, dear students, people, are already permeated inside yourselves with digital code. Do you feel that there's code inside you? No, you don't feel it? Well, go on, open your VKontakte or social network—what's there, you have a photo, someone put a like under your photo, it's nice for you, you felt good from this like. A like is just somewhere on some server, in some code, one bit changed from a zero to a one—and you feel good from the fact that somewhere a bit changed? That means this whole code where something changed is already part of you. Or, say, I don't know, we go onto the social network of some acquaintance of ours and we can already communicate a lot with them—well, we know perfectly well everything they have. That is, through your account you saw their account, your account, you somehow communicated, and that's it—all the communication has actually already happened. And indeed, well, it's such a new digital world, and you need some kind of, okay, skills for some survival, ultimately, in this world, some kind of adaptation—in short, how to consciously derive pleasure from some bits. Well, that's already happening—pleasure from bits. And somewhere something accidentally suddenly breaks and all your likes fly away—well, that's a total tragedy. Just—the array crashed—and well, it's just awful, yeah. Agreed.

Well, good. Thank you very much. It seems we've in no way refuted the thesis that everyone needs to study computer science—that you have to touch it, definitely—that instructors are needed, both IT people and those from the subject area. But we wish our listeners good luck in mastering all this, and stay tuned for our next episodes. Thanks everyone, bye!
