Lyonya, when was the last time you took a shower? In our first year, for example, they made us prove that zero is less than one. We're a kind of model of who you want to become. That's warming things up. Let's turn up the heat a little. So, what is it you actually do? Well, it all depends on all the factors.

Hi everyone, my name is Zhenya Sokolov. I work at the Faculty of Computer Science at the Higher School of Economics, and we've decided to launch a series of podcasts about how to study computer science: what's out there, how the science is structured, and so on. Our very first episode is going to be about mathematics.

Let me try to explain why. First of all, I speak quite a lot at various events, often in front of a completely unprepared audience, and naturally people ask me: how do you break into computer science, programming, analytics, data science? I give them some kind of answer, recommend some courses. And then they ask me: what do you need to know before you start studying it? I say, well, of course, mathematics. And here a much harder question arises: but why mathematics? And how do you study it? It's scary, right? At school it was all so confusing. I want to discuss that.

The second thing is that I run programs at our Center for Continuing Education. It's a place where we teach people new professions, including people who graduated from university long ago. And, paradoxically, one of the most popular programs at this center is the math-for-data-science program. So I also want to understand: why exactly this one, and not some other?

To figure all this out, we've invited two guests. This is Lyonya, who is a mathematician. We'll find out more about what he does. And so it doesn't get too stuffy, we've also invited Seryozha Karapetyan, who works in external communications at the faculty, so he can make sure everything stays clear. All right, first question. Mathematicians. People have certain myths about them, or maybe they're true. One of them is that they don't wash. Lyonya, when was the last time you took a shower?

Well, that's an unexpected question. Okay, we'll come back to it. By the way, I should say there are all sorts of people, and if among those who don't wash there are mathematicians, well... let's get to it. Lyonya, tell us a bit about yourself: where you studied, where you work, what you do.

In short, I've always been more or less interested in real, tangible things, ever since my school days. Probably starting around eighth or ninth grade. Before that I don't remember being especially interested in anything. I went to various clubs, did sports, and basically there wasn't much time left for school education. Then I got drawn into the sciences in general, not just mathematics. I was interested in physics, did informatics, was interested in chemistry, and, of course, math at school. I wasn't an olympiad kid, so to speak. I have no diplomas from international olympiads, but at least I went to olympiads, competed in things. Then I got into Moscow State University, into the Mechanics and Mathematics Faculty (Mekhmat).

So how did you get in, through your exam scores or through olympiads?

Through olympiads. With olympiads things were pretty bad for me, actually. I had MSU's own olympiads, the one called Lomonosov, "Pokori Vorobyovy Gory." I got in through those. They basically just gave you 100 points for certain subjects, but that wasn't a guaranteed admission on its own. I got in on the total score for Mekhmat, taking into account that I, well, applied twice, in a sense. At Mekhmat I studied for five years; that was still the old five-year specialist program. Now things have changed a bit. After that I stayed on at Mekhmat. I changed my supervisor and department a bit and started working in other places. I worked a little at the Institute for Information Transmission Problems (Kharkevich Institute), then... well, then I came to HSE. At HSE I worked as a research fellow in a lab, we'll probably talk about that a bit later. I also taught at HSE, and taught in parallel in other places too: at MSU and at Caltech. And now I work at Sberbank's Artificial Intelligence Lab, and I'm still working at the Higher School of Economics as a research fellow and lecturer.

Okay, let's go through all the stages of your life in order. So you got into Mekhmat. You studied there for five years, six years?

Five years.

So tell us: you arrive, you have your school math knowledge, but you're not... you participated in olympiads, but...

Yeah, but at the time I was still... well, school math is what? Solving equations, computing derivatives maybe, they teach you those kinds of things, things that require some skills, but it's unclear why you need them. Then you arrive at Mekhmat. And what happens there? You study for five years there. When you arrive at Mekhmat, every time a new stage begins they tell you: forget everything, everything, everything you've ever been taught. And at Mekhmat, none of my olympiad math knowledge and skills got in the way, because people there demanded something different. They demanded knowledge of theory, proving theorems, understanding some basic things. In the first year, for example, we proved that zero is less than one. I don't think they do that at school. But when you start building up mathematics from scratch, you're forced to prove these rather strange things, that one plus one is two, things like that, that aren't proved at school. And I had absolutely no idea what they were even going to require of me. My first such situations were colloquiums, and they were a total disaster, I failed completely, because I basically couldn't understand what they would even ask me, since it seemed to me that, well, obviously one is less than two and greater than zero, and at school nobody asks questions like this.

But did you understand why you needed it?

In that sense, no. When you go into international relations, you clearly understand that there's a model of who you want to become: a diplomat, who'll then work at an international organization, deal somehow with international affairs, at an embassy, and so on. But you go to Mekhmat, a faculty connected with mathematics, and at eleventh grade you arrive thinking, "Now they're going to load me up with math, but why?" Who did you see yourself becoming at that moment? Where did you imagine yourself in four or five years, given that you'd be proving zero is less than one for five years?

Well, obviously I had no clear trajectory, but I had some thoughts. At that time I was interested in competitive programming, to the extent it existed back then, and basically my choice was between the Faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics (VMK) and Mekhmat, and I should say I actually wanted VMK. I wrote the Lomonosov olympiad for VMK, the computational math faculty. Then, when I had the chance to submit my documents, I submitted them to both VMK and Mekhmat, because back then you still could. And it turned out that the teams doing competitive programming, who were successfully competing in international contests, were better at Mekhmat, the classic faculty. I absolutely didn't understand why, but I was told it was so and I just believed it. Okay, then this way it is. And I thought I'd be doing competitive programming, and that math would just be off to the side somewhere, and that this would be my main specialization. Back then, there really wasn't machine learning as such, or at least it wasn't anywhere near as popular. Most companies didn't automate their processes nearly as much as they do now. And so back then I just couldn't picture who I'd be in five or ten years.

And you didn't have classmates who arrived knowing that they'd study all this for five years in order to go work, say, on a trading floor? And no teachers telling you that you could?

With my classmates and groupmates, it was a bit, well, worse in that sense, because they were all... they were all guys, all of a pretty good level, a huge portion of them graduates of MSU's affiliated schools. I would ask people why they got into Mekhmat at all, why, and they'd answer, "Well, where else?" Like, I finished school and from our graduating class 80 percent went to Mekhmat, where else? So I can't say I didn't enjoy it; rather, I asked myself some questions, I had some internal trajectory connected to that competitive programming, but my groupmates' answers satisfied me less.

Twenty years ago I studied at VMK, which also has the word "mathematics" in its name, and my mom always said, like, "You'll become a math teacher, then you'll go work..." Was that ironic or not?

Honestly... it seems like in many people's heads math is the kind of field where people reproduce themselves and teach math to others, a kind of closed loop.

But olympiad math is also like that, the schools and all. For example, I see that I'm basically the only one who, by the way, finished a physics-and-math lyceum, and my circle of close friends, they have a very hard-core background in math and physics, and many didn't even become... and these aren't mathematicians who, as you'd ask, reproduce mathematicians; they include physicists, people who work in radio physics and so on.

I have to say, I think my specialization was lucky, because at a certain point a very wide choice opened up. You could, say, go into banking and do financial math, or go to a hedge fund and do trading, or go into teaching, why not, or stay at the university and do science, why not. A huge number of people who maybe weren't directly connected with programming and didn't study it at university quickly caught up, caught up with hundreds of graduates of other universities in this specialty, and now they work successfully as programmers. The number of my groupmates and coursemates in this field is just enormous. So it seems to me that getting a fundamental education is a very good idea in a way. I think it's much better than, say, sending some schoolkid to an economics faculty to become an economist if he himself doesn't really understand in advance what he wants to do, and he's sent there just because that specialty is popular right now, but no one knows what will be in demand twenty years from now. So the more fundamental the education, probably the better.

Then let me make a small note: you said your specialization was very... but you didn't tell us what your specialization actually was.

Well, I talked about studying math, and I did statistics, probability theory, stochastic processes, exactly the kind of math that is probably maximally close to data analysis.

Okay, and before we move on, let's discuss this. It's clear that when we talk about a fundamental education over five or six years, or a four-year bachelor's, what you study isn't just the skills you'll go to a "factory" and apply right away. It gives you a much more serious breadth of knowledge. For example, about people who go study history, philosophy, or philology, they say that over those years of study they learn to work well with texts, and they make good editors, good journalists, maybe. From the math point of view, suppose you studied math for five years, how does that change your skills?

I think you acquire a certain skill of constructing proofs and justifications, and maybe of digging down to very, very deep things. "Deep" isn't quite the right word, but you know what I mean. And this skill is in a certain sense very useful, because once you understand how something works, maybe we'll talk about data analysis, once you understand how something works, you get the ability to apply it in the right situation, you get the ability to modify it, adapt it to yourself, and you won't have those possibilities if you were, say, simply taught to run some function in Python and you know you just feed in data and somehow it gets processed, but what's under the hood you don't know. Math really teaches you to understand something.

Because you understand it down to the core: you don't just know that one plus one is two, you can even derive it, build the whole chain.

Right. Okay. Now they also say mathematicians have very good abstract thinking, they quickly figure everything out. What do you say about that?

Well, everyone's different, but at least imagining ten-dimensional space basically isn't that hard. And, I don't know, some things, when you... we'll probably get into bigger jungles later... when you say there's some manifold in some Euclidean space with some curvature that you can embed into a Euclidean space, and you tell ordinary people things like that... [music] I don't know, I think you could read some constructivism or whatever five times over and still not understand what they're talking about. I should say we had all sorts of courses: there was a general philosophy one, then philosophy of science, then philosophy of mathematics in particular, and many of those works I still absolutely do not understand. You read some... [music]

Let's not, this is traumatic, I'm still in shock.

Here's what I can say: I really do teach different kinds of students. Among our computer science students, among economists, I've taught humanities students too. And really, if you go along this scale, humanities students, economists, who are a bit mathematical but obviously have less math than the... and economists vary too, our HSE ones with their fairly recent math, versus other universities. So if I teach our students something, I can sometimes not even spell things out: I tell them something, and they really grasp it, they catch it. But if you teach less... different students, you really need to spell it out a bit, write a concrete numerical example, draw something, put it on the board, "watch, look," and then it works out. This is neither good nor bad, but I really feel, every day, well, not every day, but I teach regularly, that those who've worked with math for at least a couple of years are somehow able to hold abstract concepts in their heads.

I should say this is a peculiarity of our education, because in the West, say in the US, they don't study concepts without examples; it's all structured a bit differently. So it depends on the type of education. I even think that in Russia they teach differently in different places, and different graduates behave differently in certain situations.

Lyonya, how do you feel about Zorich's calculus textbook?

Honestly, it's probably one of the best textbooks I've ever read. I'd sometimes get so absorbed in it... [phone rings] Sorry, excuse me, I have an urgent call. Hello? Yes, yes. What do you mean? I did this a week ago already. I spent a whole week on it, damn, okay, I'll do it now, damn. What happened? Listen, you won't believe it: I spent a week trying to assemble this huge data table and just wasted a ton of time doing it all by hand, and it turned out junk, and now I have to redo it. Why not do it in Python? Apply some machine learning? Damn, I can't do that. Well, we happen to be running an enrollment for our Center for Continuing Education programs in data analysis, machine learning, and programming, maybe you should sign up? Okay, good advice. This would help me get it all done much faster. And where can I find out about it? There'll be a link in the description of this video, go take a look. You just saved me and changed my life, thank you so much, I'll definitely sign up and do it. We'll be waiting for you.

Now let's talk about the hardest thing: science. Could you, for Seryozha, in the simplest possible terms, explain what you did in science? You're also a candidate of mathematical sciences, with publications, a dissertation, the whole thing. What did it consist of?

If I put it in two words... Probably nobody has a problem with the question of what an algorithm is. The Schulze method, that's an algorithm... In machine learning you... A sequence of actions, right?

Yes, you have to make the computer do something, like, we go on Facebook, upload a photo, it detects our face, that's an algorithm, of course.

I worked on, basically, proving certain theoretical guarantees about how an algorithm works. The way I usually explain it... I don't know how clear or unclear it is, but the next question that arises is: why is that needed?

In terms of understanding: like, why do you need more than two hundred... You're trying to get to Berlin, say, and you decide, "I'll go out and head this way," and you prove that this algorithm will actually get you down... so to speak.

Yes, roughly like that. The thing is, let me phrase it differently. Not all algorithms, not all sequences of actions work all the time. In some cases they work, in some they don't. And it's interesting to understand when something will work and when it won't. And essentially, if you're doing this on a large scale, people who do theoretical machine learning do roughly this. There are different ideas, different branches: someone proves how fast some algorithm will converge, because you carry out a sequence of actions, and... well, everyone probably knows by now that machine learning, the science, assumes learning from data. You feed a model some previous observations. Again, on the example with pictures: you feed the model pictures on which you've manually marked the faces, you say, "this is a face, this is a face, this is a face," and the model learns from this and is then able to produce something similar. So you show the machine a picture, ask "where's the face?" and it shows you where the face is.

So there are people who, for example, prove the rate of convergence, how fast it happens, how many such labeled pictures you need so that your prediction error afterward isn't too large. There are people who develop new algorithms, because there's no universal magic pill: something works in some situations and doesn't work in others, so it's interesting to change something in the methods themselves, in the algorithms, to make something work in certain cases, or come up with a lot of new algorithms entirely, why not.

Okay, so your supervisor sets you a task: here's an algorithm, figure out when it works and when it doesn't, prove it. How do you solve that task? It's in front of you, you need to prove something.

This is a hard question, because, first of all, a well-posed question, posed by a supervisor, in a sense already contains the answer within it. To pose the right question about the right things is already practically half the work. Moreover, there are supervisors who already know how to do it, and they just say, "Apply this, this, and this, and you'll most likely get such-and-such." Then you're in a completely ideal situation. That happens rarely. If your supervisor doesn't say that, then you effectively have the question and the answer and...

The path between them.

Yes, exactly. How did it happen with me? They'd send me some article or something about a method and say "have a look at this." You start digging into it, you come up with your own questions, try to answer them, realize that, well, maybe the question is stupid, or maybe not stupid, and you try to apply something. Each person, each scientist, even in math generally, has a certain set of tools and methods that they command, and you try, with the help of your toolkit, to show or prove something. And in most cases nothing works out. I should say it's a frustrating kind of activity: often people get disappointed, it doesn't work out. And if it does work out, you start... you read up and it turns out it was already proved fifty years ago, or it's written in the textbooks.

Doesn't work out, meaning you can't find a way out, or you arrive at something and then realize it's not what you wanted? You set yourself a task, "prove something," but...

Everyone knows about certain problems that have been around for thousands of years; there's a huge number of such problems. You can read about Hilbert's problems. There's a huge number of tasks that can be... I'm not talking about machine learning now, but tasks in math that can be formulated even to a schoolkid, something about... I don't know, whether some equation will have a solution, say in integers. It turns out a simple question, in order to answer it, sometimes requires very, very serious mathematics. And if you have some questions, when you don't know something about an algorithm or some methods, it's by no means guaranteed that you'll be able to answer the question you set yourself. In 99 cases out of 100 you probably won't be able to answer it.

Then, just to spite them, let's give examples. So everyone has tools. I understand a tool: you've got, I don't know, a computer; maybe a more powerful computer; there's a tool, a hammer, you take a better hammer and it works better in the garden. But for a mathematician, the tools are what? Give an example. The brain, maybe?

I think we're now going to wander into even deeper jungles. Let's go back to basic math, maybe school math. A good question: school math, like, you're given an equation and asked whether it can be solved or not, and beforehand you've solved a number of not-very-similar equations and you've got this toolkit, you roughly know the algorithm, the sequence of actions, that should lead you to the answer, and then you solve it and it turns out it doesn't work. That happens too. And you end up in an unclear situation, you try to think up something new. But again, that doesn't always work. On the example of an equation, the toolkit is most often some mathematical apparatus, like, I don't know, differentiation: you know what derivatives mean, and you can try, in some situation where you need to prove something about the properties of certain functions, to differentiate it and understand what comes out, how things flow.

Tools, in the sense of... yeah, simple things like, you can bring fractions to a common denominator.

Yes, yes, exactly. And there's a very famous anecdote, it's actually Arnold's anecdote, our famous Russian mathematician, that when he started traveling to France and teaching, he taught at universities to serious people who do mathematics, and in their schools they aren't taught to bring fractions to a common denominator, aren't taught to compare fractions. And the anecdote... again it's not very clear how true or untrue it is, but he taught people at university how to correctly add fractions, how to compare them, because they simply weren't given that toolkit.

I see. Okay. So, you said... Let me ask: if I look at how you break down your time when you solve problems. In international relations you probably study a lot of literature, most likely, or, look, if you work at an embassy, then most often you read a large number of news items on a given topic on the internet. You need to study a question, say, what local society thinks about some party, and you open a large number of sources, from forums to newspapers, you read them, and based on that you write an informational memo. It goes to the ambassador, the ambassador reads it, makes a dispatch to Moscow, Moscow receives it. That's roughly the algorithm. But when you solve math problems, what's the breakdown of time? What percent do you spend reading scientific articles, and how much just sitting and thinking?

That actually varies a lot, depending on how much you already know in some area. If you're starting to study some new algorithm, most of the time you'll just be reading articles or textbooks on it. The more you immerse yourself in a topic, the larger the proportion of asking questions and trying to answer them becomes. At the very start it's only questions, then maybe you don't get any smarter, but... and later, when you become an expert, a specialist, you basically barely read new literature. You open an article and think, "Well, that's obvious, you could prove that on your fingers, it's very obvious." You open another article and you understand it, and the idea is, "Oh, I'd give this, for example, as an exercise to one of my students," and someone's already done it, you just need to look it up and send it to the students, say "this was done." Things like that. Pretty clear.

Okay, moving on. You said you work at Sber, in a lab, at an AI institute. I worked both there and... now in the lab. They're different entities.

Okay. And is what you do there good?

Well, in general, we write papers. We could also ask Valery, sorry, we could ask you questions about how much Sber needs this or not, in general. There's a lab; the lab is located in the central office, and in a sense it sits above certain blocks or structures of Sberbank. There's a block called Risks; there are blocks that are responsible for our services, for loans, and so on. In each block, in principle, there are people, analysts who can solve certain problems. The goal of this lab is to look at the picture from above and, first of all, help people solve their problems, because they don't always solve them optimally. If there are many ways to solve a credit-scoring problem, "should we give this person a loan or not," it's quite possible that the people in the lab know more about it and can help these people. And besides that, there are some people who do research, research already at roughly this level. There are good applied people who can solve various problems and who have some novelty, some... and they can advise people from the blocks on how to solve something. It happens that they want to apply [music] some algorithm to some problem and, for example, it doesn't work out, for various reasons. The algorithm might run for a long time, and you don't want to cut off part of the data, because you want your model to be as good as possible, but the algorithm is slow and you can't fit all the data, the question is how to do this optimally. Or you're solving a problem very similar to a standard one but it's still nonstandard, there's some peculiarity, like, additionally to some client parameters, if we're deciding whether to give a loan, we can also analyze social networks and extract something in the form of text from social networks, but the question is how to apply it. There are people at Sber who, in parallel with the applied people, try to modernize the algorithms, to answer some questions, maybe to understand whether something will work or not. Because it's one thing when you have some data, you usually invent some model structure purely empirically and it works, but that doesn't at all mean that in another similar situation it'll work. And here mathematics comes to the rescue and explains why this even worked, and whether it can always work, how often it can work.

There's a question about how the "order" comes in. Does a division come to you and say, "we'll deal with risks, we don't know, with geometry, look at our algorithm, optimize it," or do you yourselves think up a set... pick a project you like and start doing something with it?

There's no universal way; it always happens differently. Let me just sketch some situations. Often we come to them ourselves: we have certain competencies, we understand that, say, we read some article or solved some competition and managed to do something, we know which problems we can solve, and we can approach people and ask, "How do you do this? Maybe give it to us, perhaps we'll do it better." And here you have to understand that we are, in a sense, taking the bread out of these people's mouths, because these people have been working on this problem for a long time, they're "inquisitors" so to speak, and therefore they don't always come to us with their questions, simply because people think they probably know better than we do. And in most cases, since we're broad specialists, we know certain specific things in a particular industry worse than they do. So it happens that we talk and realize they're across the question much better than we are.

But, about the mathematicians: when you talk about math, you have a team, you're a mathematician, and there's also a team that does... since we're talking about risks, the risk people. How much math do you and your team have?

In any case it's there, but I think when people hire analysts, it's assumed that these people are on top of the math. But it's curious whether... it varies, I think. Again, the situation isn't uniform. Maybe Zhenya can answer this question better. I came up against it when I tried to get such a position in my time, and they'd ask me math, sometimes very specific math, which 100 percent... I know I would never have accepted it. But apparently it often happens that people themselves have forgotten something and just take a textbook, find something in it, and say, "Let's ask this." How much it's actually relevant or not is no longer very important.

About relevance, there are two points, I think. First, even as an applied person, you sometimes have to read scientific articles, just to see how others do it, and there will of course be math, and it'd be good if you at least understood what's going on. And second, yes, there are quite a few methods where you need to apply some math, and it's considered good if you know what's under the hood. So, of course, it's fine to memorize something, but usually they ask about the internal workings, the structure, even to solve some problem.

Let me, if we roll back a step, ask: have there been such extreme stories where you came in and simply opened people's eyes about their own work, that they were doing something... well, not categorically, but that there was some path they hadn't seen, and you came and said, "Hey guys, you can do it this way," and... well, probably for a bank the most important things are about money directly, that loans get given out more reliably and to the right people.

Here I'm probably not a very good source of information, in the sense that I've been working there relatively recently, and I personally haven't had... honestly... but in general I think this happens in principle. And even if, just so I don't put it too categorically, people had solved something one way, and we tweaked it just a little, even by one percent, then within Sberbank's turnover, one percent is a huge amount. So it varies, and you by no means always have to improve something dramatically to get some substantial, serious profit.

Let's turn up the heat a little. So, what is it you actually do? Tell us straight, as a specialist, what problems you solve, specifically right now.

I work on... it'll be super... gradient boosting. Let me think about where to start. Different industries have their own most commonly used algorithms. For their problems, the data is more tabular. For example, we know a client, we know how much he earns, how much he spends, maybe his transactions, his age, whether he's married or not. Often it's like this. And we want to process this information, again to decide whether to give him a credit card or not. In most cases, data in banks is tabular, not pictures, not video, just numbers. And there are certain best methods for processing tabular data and building models, and one of those is gradient boosting. It's one of the top methods: if you have tabular data and you're going to solve some problem, most likely you'll start by doing something with gradient boosting, you'll try to run it. So I work on gradient boosting. But of course not in general; I have specific tasks. Gradient boosting can help solve various problems. A model always has something we feed at the input, for example some client parameters, and the model has outputs: we predict, say, the probability that he'll repay the loan. Sometimes this output can be multidimensional: we want to predict not just the probability that he repays the loan, but, for example, we have a hundred products and we want to predict the probability that he'll be interested in each of the products, so that we can do something with him, offer him a mortgage, or whatever to offer him. We've solved that, since a model can have a multidimensional output. And it turns out that boosting is in principle very fast in itself, it can process very large arrays of data very well, but there's this notion of dimensionality: the more multidimensional this output of your model is, the more your model will train, the more time you'll need. It's quite possible your model will work fine with one output, two, three, but when there are already fifteen, maybe you won't have enough memory. The memory questions you can solve through engineering, but it might just run for your entire life: if you need ten to the power of, say, fifteen, that's very long. So I work specifically on questions of how to make this faster. There are certain narrow parts of this algorithm, some search procedures in building the models, and I think about how to make it faster.

I should say this was, in a sense, a discovery for me, because you'd think that now, with machine learning being so popular, one of the most popular algorithms, it seems like everyone should already have done this, but it turns out that very direct, very simple methods, the kind applied in a huge number of other areas, in number theory, in cryptography, and so on, hadn't been applied here. And this is my area of interest now, this is what I work on. We developed software, it's called PyBoost, "Py" obviously from the word Python, because again boosting toolboxes are very complex and are often written purely for efficiency in low-level languages so the computer reads everything faster, and in order to test some idea, like "if we change this, everything will be faster and it'll also work, maybe our model will be a little worse but we'll win on time," these small changes, because the system is very complex and written in low-level languages, are very hard to make. So we came up with, well, wrote our own boosting in order to test our hypotheses. And I think this will be useful not only to us but to other people, even for educational purposes, just to understand how it works. We made it open source, because that's more or less how science is done. So I work on speeding up boosting. And plus, naturally, we write papers on this topic. Papers assume some math, some mathematical justification for why it even works. I should say that for such complex algorithms as boosting, you can't always get a clear final result of the form "if we do it this way rather than that way, our model won't differ from the best by more than such-and-such." You can't get that exactly. But some mathematical justifications for why it can work at all and how fast it'll work, those are present.

Okay, cool, cool. Really interesting, actually. Right now in machine learning there's this trend where everyone focuses on the flashy, understandable applications, how to better recognize faces, arms, legs, and chew through texts, and tabular data has been somewhat forgotten, but I think the pendulum is swinging back now. So from you I hear that you work on boosting, and we're back to tables.

Yes, yes, because, well, pictures are cool, but in business, tabular data is everywhere. Excel isn't popular for nothing.

Right, and yes, in another of our labs they work on boosting for tabular data, so it's really... and I'm very glad you do this too. While we haven't gone too far, let's discuss a more philosophical question. You do more of the research side, and there are applied people. We'll talk in more detail about which math you need and which math they need. Suppose you're improving a machine learning algorithm, specifically, which areas of math do you use?

So, I don't want to answer this question, if you're okay with that, and let me explain again why. Because you never know in advance what specifically you'll need.

I understand. Let's say...

It's the idea, like, they played it up in the movie Forrest Gump, you never know which chocolate you'll get.

Let me rephrase the question, because we often use the word "math," but it's very multifaceted...

Right, when we say we did some... well, you need all of math; it's unclear what will come in handy. But still...

Let's take it the right way: a month of your work, what's in it. And this division into areas is also very artificial and specific, because subjects are named that way, but obviously they're all very strongly interconnected. To answer that... math always makes assumptions. And by the way, you also have to learn to communicate with mathematicians; mathematicians need to learn to communicate with non-... let's not name names. I myself still need some experience, and sometimes you talk to someone and he reasons very specifically, says very specific things, and you think, "Hm, I feel it." So yes, there are some common features, but still. Yes, yes, all right, let's get to it. So, first of all, you'll absolutely, definitely need mathematical analysis (calculus).

And which parts of calculus did you use?

Probably it's easier to say what I didn't use, in a sense. So, mathematical analysis isn't some field of knowledge that is a "science," it's the base of mathematics; it's just a set of certain objects and ways of manipulating them. Those are exactly the tools you mentioned, and you also study, by the way, proofs, among other things. It's hard for me to imagine a person who is going to do research, no matter whether in physics, chemistry, or machine learning, and who won't understand what a function is. Functions you probably need, because physical processes, our laws, are also functions: how what depends on what. We look, for example, at data on COVID incidence as a function of time, it's some function, and calculus tells us how to characterize this function, how it can be written, how it can be studied, what properties it has.

So, name a few things.

Right, well, calculus, I don't know, gradients, where... Let me start. Functions, all operations connected with functions, those are derivatives and integrals, some understanding of what kinds of functions there are and how they relate to one another. For example, there are exponentials that grow faster than logarithms, because in any case, especially if we talk about machine learning, you'll be approximating some dependency, for example the conditional probability of loan repayment as a function of client parameters, and you need to understand with which functions you're going to approximate it, you need to understand how which functions behave. That's a huge part of mathematical analysis: functions. I didn't say the word "gradient," just because we said... well, derivatives in the multidimensional case. As for what concerns functions, calculus, we've discussed it.

What else will you definitely need?

Linear algebra, too. Again, you shouldn't treat it as some "science," it's just a certain set of objects and answers to the question of how you can work with these objects at all, starting with the fact that we'll need the notion of a matrix, because a matrix is just a table of data, a table of numbers. And our data, we said, can be a table, so tabular data can be called matrix data if you like.

You can, it looks more... uh...

There are different things there too. Besides learning to operate with matrices, to subtract and multiply them and do such things, you may need things connected with, let's call it approximation. The point is that you can't always process your large data table well "head-on," and it may be interesting to find some representation for this table.

Another bit of math.

Yes, an approximate representation of this table. Math can say "switch to a different basis," in which this can be worked with much more simply and conveniently, also purely from a computational point of view. And here all sorts of matrix decompositions can come in handy. A decomposition is just when you represent a matrix as several compositions of some other matrices. It's worth looking into. What else from linear algebra? Some basic understandings about how to work with vectors, what a multidimensional space is in general, scary things like, I don't know, the dot product, things that are also used in many places. I wanted to say that we talk about a division between calculus and linear algebra, but in calculus we talked about gradients, and a gradient is essentially a vector in some space, so they're very tightly interwoven. We've discussed that.

What else will you definitely need?

Most likely you'll need some probability theory and statistics, just because very often some algorithms can be called probabilistic; they assume, for example, that you observe some dependency of one thing on another. We say... let's call it... so, the probability of loan repayment somehow depends on the features you collected about your client, but obviously you didn't account for all the features; there's some part of unaccounted-for factors, and this part of unaccounted-for factors is modeled from a probabilistic standpoint, as some random error.

Situational factors.

Yes, exactly, situational factors, and this comes up in many places. And if you later study some properties of these algorithms and obtain some guarantees, you'll one hundred percent run into this, because you can't prove anything without assuming there's some noise that is probabilistic. You need to make some assumptions. Probability is also very strongly integrated into the natural sciences, in that there are always some unaccounted-for factors that are modeled by random noise. For example, I throw a stone, and there's physics that says it should fly along a parabola, a special kind of trajectory, but a parabola is only a first approximation of the real trajectory; there's also air pressure, wind, and so on, and the trajectory is ideal only in an ideal world, but there's no ideal world. So it's a first approximation. Probability theory you'll absolutely, definitely need.

Next there's statistics. Often probability and statistics aren't strongly distinguished, but on the other hand, in universities they're often studied separately, and in statistics there are also many important questions you'll most likely need. For example, the classic problem of A/B testing. Suppose you have two scoring models that give you some probability, and you want to understand which of them is better. On one hand, you can compute something on your data and just see which model predicts better on the data you have. On the other hand, the question arises: why do you conclude, from the data you see, that if a model works better on this data it will always work better? And here the question of statistical significance arises: how much can we draw such conclusions? This is something needed very often in many places, not only machine learning.

How much data do you need to feed in to be at least minimally confident that next time it'll work the same way? How many test clients do you need?

It all depends on all the factors; it depends, naturally, on the model, on how strongly the models differ.

So sketch the boundaries: how much is definitely not enough, and how much is definitely enough? Ten is definitely not enough...

To measure... let me make a fun little caveat. We always draw a conclusion; it's just that our confidence is expressed as some probability. For example, we have ten observations, but we'll be confident in our conclusion to some number of percent; maybe yes, maybe no, like flipping a coin, randomness. But the more data, the better it gets. And usually you need at least several hundred, preferably thousands of observations; if there's more, even better.

Okay, let's draw a line. I wanted to make a clickbait statement: so it turns out that in a bank it's very important to assess who will repay and who won't, so the bank doesn't go bust; it's important to detect where you yourself used your card and where fraudsters or thieves used it. To do this you need to analyze tabular data, to build good algorithms that do all this. To analyze tabular data you need gradient boosting; to improve gradient boosting you need to understand what derivatives, matrices, dot products, probability, and so on are. So there's a direct connection.

Yes.

So all of this really isn't just about teaching others these terms at school; it's so that... Let me put it correctly: a researcher, you use the mathematical apparatus precisely to improve these algorithms, to understand how to reassemble this "machine" differently so it works better. And the applied people, who solve concrete problems, they rather need the mathematical apparatus to understand how the "machine" works, even though they won't reassemble it.

Right, but it's still important for them to understand how it turns out, important to understand why they get what they get; they need it more for understanding, for developing... well.

Okay, let's move on to our last big part, about teaching. You teach with us, mainly to adults in continuing education programs. What do you teach in most cases?

I mostly teach probability theory, statistics, things connected to my specialization, but sometimes just math.

And you teach both adults in retraining programs and students. What's the difference, what's specific about working with adults who've come to master a new profession?

It's always harder. Let's start with the fact that it's harder for the teacher, because the audience is very heterogeneous; very different people come. There are people who studied it once and have forgotten it, people who've never heard of it since school, and very, very different people, to the point that we, for example, had people from GITIS, the theater institute, and you'd think, well, why not. A very varied audience, and you of course have to adapt to it. With students you can take a pretty bad step that everyone often takes: you can say, "If you don't know this, you were supposed to study it here and there, so go back and recall what it is," because still, when you teach not the first subject, in the first year you know these people know calculus and linear algebra and you can operate with these things. But with adults you never know what these people do or don't know, and it's always different: every group is completely individual, and you have to adapt to each one separately.

It's also often said that the younger you are, the more easily you absorb complex concepts. Can you confirm or refute this from your own experience, your own teaching?

Well, in a sense there's probably some age starting from which everything really does become harder, but obviously not at... I don't know, up to fifty I'd say not. I remember people came who were already over sixty, and you'd think, what for? But the person was interested and was learning something, and I should say he learned a lot, because he put a lot of his time into it, and in terms of performance he was no different from the very best students in that group.

That's very nice to hear. People are very different.

Here I'd even say that the success of learning is probably influenced, off the top of my head, by three main factors. One is the question of your personal time, how much time you're ready to invest. Obviously, the more time, the more you manage to do and learn, but the main thing is rather just that you have time at all, because if you only come to lectures and listen and then go back to your job, you don't do the homework, don't do those kinds of things. Then comes motivation: there are people who, I don't know, don't really know why they need it, versus people who specifically know "I want to be able to solve this." Motivation matters a lot too, that's also obvious. And the third factor, oddly enough, is the person's sociability, because what distinguishes our courses from, say, just a book is that we have teachers, we have students, and you should definitely make use of that. Because if they just listen to a lecture or copy something down, then with roughly the same effect they could watch someone's online course or just read a book. A teacher, besides adapting to people and trying to understand how well a person is absorbing it, still doesn't see everything, and there may be other people he also needs to adapt to. So this communication with the teacher, where you can ask a question and immediately get an answer and then keep understanding the rest of the lecture, rather than being lost, is very important. Plus, also, with students it's very useful to study together with someone. It's one thing to just read a book at home by yourself, another thing when you gather into groups and discuss things, when someone has a question and other people answer.

Yes, yes, yes. Actually, again, on the question of teaching methods and our education system in general, it's a very natural thing to band together into groups, and it's very useful, just incredibly useful. And at universities, on the contrary, it's not allowed: you can't do homework with someone, because if they catch you, "you didn't submit, we saw you copying from each other," you get a failing grade and you're chased out in disgrace. Whereas, for example, in our case, even at... I taught even at RTU MIREA and the like, on the contrary I advised people to band into groups. The only thing you need to control is keeping the groups from being too large; ideally three, and you let, say, the whole group submit just one file with some solution. And I think that's how it works. And it works not only in math but in English too: when you learn a language, the classic thing is the "study buddy," where you talk in parallel with someone and help each other. I've wandered into the jungle again, but sociability is also very important.

Absolutely. I subscribe to all three factors. I'd probably add, on top of the first and second, on top of time and motivation, that you need, especially when studying complex things, some positive mindset; you have to be ready to suffer and struggle, because you definitely won't succeed at first, and I often see, especially when I talk with schoolkids who are just starting, they try complex things and "I tried, it didn't work," and you're like, "That's it, all is lost, I'm dumb, this isn't for me." Under no circumstances should it be that way; everyone fails at first, you have to be ready for it. And again, sociability helps here in part: when you do it with someone, you have more of a chance to get through the hard parts.

There's this problem, I think, that across our different schools, and we didn't even cross paths, none of the levels of education really cultivate the idea that it's okay to make mistakes, that that's the right way; it's a very rare quality, sadly.

And I wanted to ask another thing: what possibilities for motivation are there in general? The thing is, with university students who study at... it's clear: a student has grades, good and bad, and if you study badly there are consequences; but if you came to some... and don't want to study, you don't have to. In the case of a person who came not especially fired up about learning, what can you do, how can you nudge them?

Well, in general, the absence of motivation is very hard to influence, I think. One of the main things you can do, that you're basically obliged to do as a teacher, is to motivate students with examples, cases from life, and in general to explain why you're telling them this. But if such stories don't motivate a person, then maybe they just came...

I'll add, actually, from my experience: it motivates people very well when they have a living example in front of them to look up to. For example, it's very useful to bring in, for students and for listeners of such retraining programs, already-successful specialists who've achieved something, written cool stacks, come up with something cool in science, who earn good money and have nice things, and who are charismatic and say, "Basically, I do gradients every day," that kind of thing. People listen to such a person and think, "I want to be like that too." We're people, after all; we're used to orienting ourselves by others, and these feelings need to be cultivated somehow.

Good points, completely agree. And it's cool when adults come to such retraining who already have a clear goal, who want to change jobs, and in their heads they already have, "There's a junior developer position at Yandex I want," and if they hold that in their heads too...

Right, and I think this problem may be acute for teachers who work with schoolkids or students. What I like about teaching here is that people come, they pay money for it, their hard-earned money, like people who go to the gym, and that already means a person is ready to put in effort. Maybe he didn't like something, something didn't click, or he expected rainbows and unicorns and here it's more about suffering through derivatives, but I think we have far fewer problems with motivation and more problems with how to tell people things so that they all keep up.

Can I ask a super off-topic thing? I understand it may not be obvious, but how often do people come who had some harsh burnout at their previous job, say a designer-architect for international projects or whoever, who did this and now "I can't anymore, I want to sit calmly with a coffee and a laptop and press little buttons"?

This may not be exactly an answer to your question, but the kind of burnout I've observed is when someone comes who works, say, as a tester, doing pretty routine work: yet another release, yet another version of the app needs checking, that all the buttons click and all the functions function. Or, say, an analyst, the kind who prepares reports, has a pile of Excel tables, configures some filters, makes pivot tables, gets a report, and he's been doing this for ten years and is just sick of it.

Fed up to the teeth.

Yes, exactly. And he really has reached the point of wanting to do something interesting. And to do something interesting, you need, well, to learn some math, to find out about algorithms, to learn to program. And this happens fairly often, I think; these people may even understand better than the rest, in an absolute sense, that... and they also have all the developers sitting right next to them, very close, with one foot already in, but they're missing some block; they're like, "What am I missing? Mathematics," and...

Let's discuss the two questions I raised at the start. One: as I said, there's a math-for-data-science program, it's part of a larger set of programs, and within that block it's one of the most popular; our listeners just love it. Why, do you think? Why exactly math, when you'd think people don't like to suffer, yet you hand them the whip and they flog themselves in the evenings?

That's a good question. In a sense, I in some way see the result of this work, in that we've learned to explain complex things more simply, and again from experience we know how to explain, maybe not necessarily more simply, but accounting for the average person's background. And the popularity is maybe connected with that, because math is something usually heavy and hard, and for many it's very hard to start studying math from scratch on their own. And here they come, they have a collective, everyone's ready to suffer together, there's a teacher who says, "No, you won't suffer; only sometimes." And, well, I think math is hard to study. From my... there's a huge amount of literature and courses on machine learning, look, Zhenya's huge course, there's a lot. But with math, unfortunately, it doesn't work that way, because it's not enough just to watch lectures; you need some practice, and not only practice in the sense of solving problems, although... but here precisely I'd disagree; there are levels of understanding not only in solving problems but in understanding proofs, so that you can explain to someone why something works, not just solve an example by plugging in numbers; you also have to be able to reason and explain. And that's usually hard, for various reasons, and there can be a lot to it. It happens that people think they understand everything, when they didn't really get it, and then when they start building their own constructions it turns out they understood something poorly. And usually, in a conversation with a teacher, such things are easily caught: someone answers a question correctly but not quite right. And partly because of this, this block is hard, hard to approach alone, there's a kind of challenge to it, and thanks to you people meet this challenge and come out going "Wow, I made it." We can teach, sure, why not, but not everyone is ready for it; a person may need... And I think that after our course, if you actually pass it successfully, a person will at least have, first, an understanding of basic concepts, some base, and they'll easily be able to build new knowledge on this base; at least they'll see that they don't know something, understand where they can find it, and hopefully find it and learn it.

You get the erudition thanks to which you can then build...

Erudition, the base.

And I have another hypothesis, tell me if it's right or not. It seems to me that at school absolutely everyone suffered with math, for many reasons we won't discuss now, like it was something painful. And then people come to you and realize it's actually interesting, that they actually can do it, and this childhood trauma gets worked through. Is that also why your course is successful, or not?

[music] What I wanted to say is that at school children are crammed with a huge amount of information that's absolutely unnecessary for them, and the information appears in their heads much earlier than the questions that this information answers arise. There are some approaches to education... why not, it's successful in a way; we have very strong schools, and so on. And this painfulness is more connected with the fact that the school curriculum is quite hard, and for people who don't really understand why they need it, to live through it... You study math from roughly second through... or first through eleventh grade, so all of school, more than ten years, studying something you sort of don't... Well, fine, let's set aside elementary school, where we learn to add, multiply, the multiplication table, long division, the understanding of what numbers are, that this is needed; and fractions appear at the moment when these letters appear, when letters appear, people, like, start to wilt, around age... well. And partly the problem is probably this: people who come to us go for math for data analysis from the start, they have motivation, and we additionally explain why, for example, you need a derivative, why we integrate, and it becomes much easier for them.

A fun fact too: we're going to discuss... how should we... [music] how we should study math. [music]

Great, let's move on to the questions. Let's put it very concretely. As I said, I'm constantly asked how to start getting into math, because people listen, I tell them something, and they begin to understand that, sure, for machine learning you of course need to write some code, but you also need at least some mathematical base. So, you've already said you should go where an experienced teacher will teach you, where you'll have some groupmates to study with. But still, that's already a serious step, money and so on. How do you just start, just touch math?

Here's how I usually divide it into three stages. The first stage, let's not number it; let's call it the zeroth, the basic one. This is when you remember almost nothing about math, and there are quite a lot of such people too, because again, at school not everyone likes math, and that's absolutely normal. You don't know how to do certain things, you don't know what a function is, what kinds of functions there are, how they relate to each other, you can't differentiate, can't integrate, even though it's all covered at school, and integrals are covered at school, well, it depends on the school...

Some don't get to them.

Right, some don't get to them, and people grumble and leave dissatisfied, and for them this stuff... But I say you need to "go back to school," in the sense that if you've completely forgotten the base, just take good school textbooks and leaf through them. Most of it will be very clear to you, because they're written for children, you can read them from age eight, say, and they're written for children in the most accessible way possible. The range of topics was also chosen by very smart people who thought long and hard about how to teach math. So just take school textbooks and read them.

Let me clarify: if it's a good textbook... there are popular ones, apparently. Let me clarify, if I remember correctly, it was long ago of course, but at school in some grade we had a separate textbook for algebra and a separate one for geometry. Do you need to take the other one too and read it, or only algebra?

I'd talk more about algebra, of course. Geometry is more for something else; what interests us is more...

Okay, so the zeroth stage, the "super saver": take the eighth-through-eleventh-grade school textbooks, leaf through them, nobody's asking you to read every topic, nobody's asking you to solve every problem, just look, most of it will be clear to you, and what isn't clear you'll very easily identify and easily fill in, because it's all written super accessibly. The worst advice in this case is to tell a person, "You want to learn calculus? Here's Zorich's textbook, the best textbook ever." It's a huge two-volume set, you order it on Ozon, they deliver it, you look at it, and in ten days... maybe in ten days. So school textbooks are very concentrated and very thin, not very large. Advice number one.

So you've got some... that's the zeroth stage done. The first stage means going further. If at school you got acquainted with certain objects and learned to solve some problems, the next stage is that you need to learn to build your own chain of reasoning, to prove something, not just compute. Here you probably can't do without university textbooks, and you need to find textbooks that aren't encyclopedic, not just collections of billions of facts distributed across topics and very, very large. There are many textbooks called "Introduction to..." that are as simple as possible with a large number of examples; try to find such textbooks, that helps a lot.

Can you name specific ones?

Well, in probability and statistics I probably can; with math it's a bit harder, in the sense that I learned... I went straight to the [advanced] textbooks, so I had no reason to reread simple textbooks, so maybe not, and I didn't teach all of it, so I lack that experience and don't know all the textbooks.

The thought is, before examples, it's very important, if you're going to do data analysis, incredibly important, to improve your English. Unfortunately, the field develops so fast that I just can't imagine some good specialist who suddenly learned everything from Russian sources. And the textbooks I'm going to mention are in most cases Western, not because we write bad textbooks, we have very good examples, but simply because in English the choice is much larger, many times larger, in fact. The advice should really have been the first one: I just can't imagine doing data analysis and not being able to read... most of the areas...

Yes, yes, absolutely, absolutely. It's a kind of mandatory, natural thing. And one caveat: many people are afraid to study English because you have to speak it and deal with conversation, but reading literature, mathematical literature, is a different skill. It's not at all necessary that if you know the language well and speak it fluently, you'll automatically be able to read the literature, and conversely. Most of my acquaintances and colleagues, if you read literature in English and understand it, it doesn't necessarily mean you know the language well; they're quite different.

Well, all right. For example, calculus: there's a textbook... I really liked it, simple, a huge number of pictures, accessible, wonderful. Linear algebra: many people speak about Gilbert Strang, seems right, fully so. You can expand the list, because again, I'm just saying I haven't read such textbooks and know this more by hearsay. Probability... by the way, it's also very useful to just Google on Amazon, look up "textbook on such-and-such," and just look at the rating; that works in most cases. Probability: just because I teach, I have a large reading list. I highly recommend starting with the translated textbook by... there's a Russian translation... and it was translated by Mikhail Borisovich, my supervisor. It's a classic Western textbook in which everything is built from scratch with examples; I really like it. There are also a number of textbooks literally called "Introduction to Probability Theory." Since everyone's experience with textbooks is individual, I probably won't name specific authors; you just open it, look, read the first part, the first five thousand pages, and if it doesn't click, it doesn't click; if it does, it does.

Statistics: statistics is harder; here you again probably need to go to Western literature. First, the same author, Mikhail Borisovich, has a book called... visual... by the creator of wonderful little books "with the cow." It has a lot of examples, much better than some academic textbooks. I just like it, I recommend it. The "book with the cow," that's what we call it; the name escapes me, but there's literally a cow drawn on it. The cow is a cylinder, the way they're "dragged by the ears," or it's about some paradoxes, regression, when you try to predict a cow's weight by its girth and length; you can build a model, why not, money isn't the only thing you can compute, you can weigh cows too. Many people like... it's already hardcore, we go a bit further. There's also a book called "Introduction to..." A/B testing; there are probably several, but again, the highest-rated book is most likely it; I don't remember the authors, unfortunately, but everything is laid out very thoroughly and nicely, both the mathematical part and, very importantly, the part connected with conducting experiments, because you also need to be able to run A/B tests. And there's a book I really liked called something with statistics, where a lot is written clearly. There may be too many recommendations.

Good, I think we'll write them in the video description.

Yes, yes, not off the top of my head.

We're running low on time; let's very briefly cover the second stage. So: zeroth, school textbooks; then the first stage, building reasoning; and then the third stage?

So, at the zeroth stage we get acquainted with the base; at the first stage we start building reasoning; at the third stage it's already a kind of free swimming, when you're able to read real academic literature, but you read it not cover to cover. You don't take, say, Zorich's two-volume calculus and read from the first page or from page one through six hundred; you understand that you need to open the right page on the right topic and study it. You can do this by articles, by some textbooks. So it's a kind of free swimming, and you try, whereas before you built reasoning, most likely in response to questions that were in these textbooks, here you start asking yourself questions, "what do I know, what don't I know," and try to understand that somewhere in your reasoning there are gaps, and you patch these little gaps with the help of these complex textbooks. So, say, textbooks from the MSU publishing house are the last "dance," the last stage, the one that will make you a better specialist, but you still have to work up to it.

And what about journals, the latest scientific papers?

Well, papers and academic literature, for me at least, aren't strongly separated, because the classical math you know you somehow memorize from textbooks, and the new math directly connected to your task you study from papers, documents.

Good, thank you very much, Lyonya. Let's sum up some conclusions, perhaps, of what we discussed today. First, about education: we talked about how a mathematical, fundamental education helps you learn to dig down to the truth, helps build abstract thinking, and that this comes in very handy for understanding any concepts. We discussed that in modern data science math is needed everywhere, by practicing specialists just to understand how it works, and by researchers to understand how to improve it and maybe prove why it works. We discussed education, and a very positive point, I think, that even if you're sixty you can keep learning math and machine learning, so we invite everyone. And we discussed a paradoxical point: that you should start getting into math with school textbooks. That's when you can begin, roughly from the first stage, with textbooks like the "Introduction to..." ones, and school textbooks. I love it. I'll dare to say I think it didn't even turn out too stuffy, even though it's math.

We had a button: if you guys had started to overcook it, started getting too stuffy on math, I'd have... I had the option to press it, but I think everything was super clear. Thank you, thank you, Lyonya, thank you, and thank you all for your attention. See you in our next episodes. Goodbye. Bye.
